

Table of Contents 
3 Level Up your Digital Accessibility Program
4 Introduction
5 About the Survey Participants
7 The State of Accessibility Programs
11 Business and Personal Drivers for Accessibility
13 Goals for Accessibility Programs in 2022
16 Challenges for Accessibility Programs
19 Accessibility Program Maturity
26 Product Development
29 Testing Process
30 Accessibility Testing Tools
33 Accessibility Monitoring Tools
34 Auditing the Accessibility Audit
35 User Experience and Inclusive Design
38 Content Creation
44 Customer Service and Accessibility Feedback
45 Lawsuits and Litigation
46 Human Resources and Diversity and Inclusion Programs
47 Buying and Selling Accessible Technology
48 Training, Education, and Certifcation
50 About eSSENTIAL Accessibility + Level Access
51 About G3ict
52 About IAAP
| Table of Contents


The 2022 report will cover the following themes: 

Benchmarking data 
The 1,030 participants in the survey represent nearly every industry group and organization size. The report provides a set of tools to benchmark an accessibility program and understand where, and how, investments in digital accessibility can have a signifcant impact on an organization and for people with disabilities.
Drivers, goals, and challenges 
Every accessibility program has a story-a spark to get things started, goals to achieve, and obstacles along the way. The report tells these stories through data so organizations with a maturing accessibility program will fnd they are in good company.
Program maturity markers  
The 2020 State of Digital Accessibility Report was the frst to start tracking program maturity by asking participants to identify markers of a mature accessibility program and noting whether their organization had achieved those goals. This year's survey delves deeper into the maturity question and tracks the progress of each maturity marker.
Product development, design, and testing  
The majority of people who took the 2022 survey identifed themselves as responsible for the design, development, and testing of websites, apps, and other digital assets. Insights about tools, training, user testing by people with disabilities, and more will be presented.
Content creation   
Digital accessibility is not limited to code. All content published digitally should be accessible to people with disabilities, including blog posts, documents, emails, webinars, videos, and social media. The report delves into all types of electronic content and the processes by which they are created, tested, and published.
Customer service and accessibility feedback 
Accessibility is an ongoing efort. As content changes, new errors may be introduced, and it's important to provide a way for users to submit feedback. It's also important to document the way in which organizations are resolving that feedback. In this year's survey,

we ask about this process.
| Introduction
The top five industries include: 

15.9% 9.1% 7.8% 7.6%  6.4% Education  Services    Software Manufacturers Accessibility  
 Consulting  and Services State and Local Government Web Design and Marketing 

Job duties of survey participants 
Participants were asked to select up to fve duties that were either part of their job or part of the jobs of people they manage. Their selections were used to customize the remaining questions in the survey.

Job duties within Website and Product Development 

Job duties within Marketing and Content Creation 

Other job duties 
22.7% Customer Service / Accessibility Feedback
10.5% 	Procurement of Software / Hardware
8.5% 	HR / Diversity and Inclusion
8.4% 	Selling your organization's products / services
| About the Survey Participants

The majority of accessibility programs are less than seven years old. 
This was similar to fndings in the 2021 survey. Aligned with that, this indicates that most programs-and accessibility initiatives as a whole-are still relatively new.
How long has your organization been actively working toward  accessibility compliance? 

Overall accessibility program maturity rating for policy and  commitment to accessibility 
With regard to a commitment to accessibility, approximately 40%of 2022 survey participants rated their organization's written policy and commitment to accessibility as "Proactive," the highest rating possible. Nearly 41%gave themselves a rating of "In Progress."
Weighted Average Maturity Rating-2.14 out of 3.0-"In Progress" Governance of accessibility is 	36.6%of accessibility programs have distributed often distributed among  	responsibility, which is down from 53.6% several departments. 	in 2021. 44.1%of programs roll up to one
department or leader, up from 30.8%in 2021.
	Is accountability / governance for accessibility centralized? 


"Governance and visibility rolls up to the design system platform team, accountability is owned by feature teams"
"Application teams are responsible for their software"
"Both the Product General Manager (Sales and Development) and Cross organization Center of Competency"

"The accessibility SME is in IT Services, but all employees are responsible for creating accessible content"

Weighted Average Maturity Rating-2.0 out of 3.0-"In Progress" Accessibility budgets are often distributed. 
27.2%reported having a centralized budget for accessibility, which is up from21.4%in 2021. The majority reported their budget is distributed among the departments responsible for accessibility governance or varies by project.
	Management of accessibility program budgets 
 Distributed-60.1% 
| The State of Accessibility Programs
Responses 	Answer choices 

| Business and Personal Drivers for Accessibility
Personal motivations for accessibility 
The survey also asked about personal motivations for addressing accessibility, since these often difer from business drivers. In 2022, individuals are far more concerned with inclusivity (84.0%) and user experience (78.7%) than their organizations.
	What motivates you personally to address accessibility? 
Responses 	Answer choices 

| Business and Personal Drivers for Accessibility

What are your organization's accessibility goals for 2022? (Select all that apply) 

Improving usability for people  with disabilities-73.4% 
Improving conformance to accessibility standards / guidelines-73.0% 
Implementing a standard, organizationwide approach to accessibility-62.7% 
Maturing an accessibility program-45.3% 
Expanding our accessibility initiative to include our mobile app-26.8% 
6. Preventing, reducing or eliminating lawsuits fled against our organization
7. Making virtual work environments accessible
8. Maintaining the current level of accessibility
9. Addressing accessibility issues brought to light by COVID 19
10.Launching an accessibility program

Improving usability for people with disabilities 
Since inclusivity was a top driver for accessibility programs, it makes sense to see improving usability at the top of the list of 2022 goals, with 73.4%of respondents selecting it, up from 65.0%in 2021.
This was the number one goal for most industries, organization sizes, and accessibility programs of all ages, both in the United States and worldwide. The numbers suggest that more organizations are moving beyond the goal of compliance with standards to prioritizing better user experience, making sites more equitable for all users.
Improving conformance to accessibility standards / guidelines  
Improving conformance to accessibility standards was a goal for 73%of survey participants. This goal was particularly prevalent in:
• State and Local Governments, Education, and Financial Services
• Organizations with 1,001 5,000 employees
• Organizations with accessibility programs that are seven	to 10 years old
Implementing a standard, organization-wide approach  to accessibility  
More than half (62.7%) of participants listed implementing an organization wide approach to accessibility as an organizational goal for 2022, a signifcant jump from 51.9%in 2021.
This was the number one goal for organizations with 50 99 employees.
For organizations with 50,000+ employees and those with accessibility programs older than 10 years old, this dropped to the number four spot. Larger organizations and those with older programs were more focused on maturing their approach versus implementing one.
Maturing an accessibility program   
Overall, 45.3%of survey participants list maturing their accessibility program as a top goal for 2022. But this goal was even more of a priority for larger organizations and those with older accessibility programs:
• Organizations with 50,000 or more employees-61.1% 
• Accessibility programs that are 11 20 years old-53.5% 
Maturity for one organization may mean investing in better monitoring and testing tools and adhering to a schedule of regular audits. For another organization, it may mean engaging more with the disability community and hiring usability testers with various disabilities.
Expanding our accessibility initiative to include our mobile apps 
Expansion of accessibility to mobile apps rounded out the top fve goals for 2022 with 26.8%of organizations selecting it.
Of the organizations that included this as a goal, 74.8%are currently testing their mobile apps. Mobile testing methods include automated tools (49.5%), manual inspection (58.7%), and testing by people with disabilities (33.5%). In addition, 71.0% said they test their mobile apps with assistive technology or system accessibility settings like high contrast mode.

Responses 	Answer choices 
have disabilities For those involved in the creation of digital properties- including Product, UX, Engineering, and others-this challenge ranked high. Overall, incorporating accessibility earlier in the development lifecycle was the number one challenge for:
Roles: 
Incorporating accessibility earlier in the development lifecycle-61.4% This challenge rose to the top spot from number three in 2021, when it was at 53.2%. When digital accessibility is only considered after a product is developed, remediation takes more time and energy. It is much more cost efective to be thinking about inclusive design at the frst stages of planning a new product or a new feature for an existing product.• Digital Accessibility Specialist
• Design / UX
• Development / Engineering and Product
Industries: 
• Banking
• Education
• Government
Training-51.4% Every role listed training among their top three challenges. With competing priorities, it can be hard to make time for professional development. However, training drops to the seventh highest challenge from programs with IAAP certifed employees. This is likely because those organizations recognize the importance of training and have training programs in place, not because it is no longer viewed as a requirement.	Hiring people with 	This challenge is new to the top fve in 2022, moving
experience in digital accessibility-44.0% up from the number eight spot in 2021. There is high demand for people that "get" digital accessibility and have experience in the feld. This demand is clearly increasing over time.
Maturing an accessibility program was a top goal for organizations in 2022. 
Organizations across all sizes, verticals, and ages of accessibility programs selected "Maturing an accessibility program" in their top fve goals in 2020 (44%), 2021 (42.6%), and 2022 (45.3%).
Those organizations most likely to choose program maturity as a 2022 goal:
• Have 5,000 to 50,000 employees
• Report four	to six year old accessibility programs
• Operate in Education, Technology, and Financial Services
• Employ IAAP certifed personnel
• Work with an accessibility vendor

Monitoring and testing tools 	48.5% 
Weighted Average Maturity Rating- 
2.0 out of 3.0-"In Progress" Most accessibility testers rated their access to	
accessibility testing tools as "In Progress."	Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive 
Weighted Average Maturity Rating- 
2.1 out of 3.0-"In Progress" 	40.9% 	39.8% 
Survey respondents rated their organization's written policy / commitment, with 40.9%rating
their policy as "In Progress."	Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive 
	existent 	Progress 
Process to resolve, document, and audit accessibility complaints 	38.0% 

Weighted Average Maturity Rating- 
1.9 out of 3.0-"Reactive"                                                     Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive Survey respondents rated their organization's	existent 	Progress 
process to resolve, document, and audit
Engagement with the disability community 	51.4% 

Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-2.3 out of 3.0-"In Progress" 51.4% of respondents rated their organization's	Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive engagement with the disability community	existent 	Progress 
Internal accessibility scorecard 	49.5% 
Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-2.1 out of 3.0-"In Progress" Most accessibility auditing professionals rated their internal accessibility scorecard as "In Progress."
Policies and procedures for procuring accessible software and hardware 	54.4% 
Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-2.1 out of 3.0-"In Progress" The majority of respondents in procurement roles rated their accessibility policies and procedures as "In Progress."
Funding for accessibility 	36.7% 

Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-2.0 out of 3.0-"In Progress" 36.7%of survey respondents rated their	Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive organization's funding for accessibility	existent 	Progress 
programs as "In Progress."
Training programs and policies 
Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-1.83 out of 3.0-"Reactive" In 2022, 62.7%of respondents reported their organization provided training on accessibility
topics, a jump from 52.6%in 2021.	existent 	Progress 
More on training programs and policies on page 48. 
Content publishing practices and process 	49.8% 
Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-1.86 out of 3.0-"Reactive" 
While most respondents rated their content authoring accessibility gates and practices as "In Progress," the weighted average is "Reactive."

 Non- Reactive In Proactive existent Progress 

Engineering gates and practices 
46.2% 
Weighted Average Maturity 
Rating-1.75 out of 3.0-"Reactive" Most survey respondents in development roles rated engineering accessibility gates and
practices as "In Progress."	Non-	Reactive 	In 	Proactive 
	existent 	Progress 

Accessibility teams scale alongside their development team. 
Ideally, every developer should have been trained on, and be responsible for accessibility. The reality, however, is quite diferent. In 2022, 42.9% of organizations have between one and three people who work primarily on accessibility.
As product development teams grow, so do their accessibility teams. The 2022 survey numbers reported below can be used to justify an increased budget for accessibility experts.
Most organizations report having one to three developers working primarily on accessibility. 

What affects the size of accessibility teams? 
The survey analyzed the organizations with more than 10 people on their accessibility team,

and a few factors stood out:
Organization size 
have more than
46.9% 50,000 employees
Number of developers in the organization 
have more than
71.9% 250 developers
Access to expertise 
23.4% have IAAPcertifed personnel
50.3% partner with anaccessibility vendor

Accessibility and product requirements 
The product requirementsThe product requirements included accessibility,included accessibility, but
and our team understoodour team did not understand how to meet thosehow to meet those requirements-45.5%.requirements-26.2%.The product requirements did not mention accessibility at all-28.3%.The survey asked development professionals to think about their most recent project and pick the statement that best described it:
When product requirements included accessibility: 
	The good news: Accessibility is included in seven of 10 product requirements. 
71.7% reported that accessibility was included in the product requirements.	The bad news: Some still report a lack of understanding and training on accessibility. 
54.5%of the time, teams either did not understand how to implement accessibility, or it wasn't documented.
53.2% rated their Engineering and Development team's accessibility knowledge as "Elementary" or "Non existent."
Just more than half of organizations (52.5%) are testing their product by people with disabilities.
While 96.5%agree that testing by people with disabilities is important,37.3%of organizations are not doing it. The latter number is down signifcantly from 47.2%in the 2021 survey.
While automated and manual testing can identify many accessibility barriers, the best way to ensure an inclusive experience is to involve people with disabilities. Their experience is an invaluable part of the development process.
More established programs are more inclusive. 
A clear trend appeared in the relationship between age of accessibility program and inclusion of people with disabilities. The older the program, the more likely it was to be inclusive. In fact, the age of accessibility program was more of a predictor than the overall size of the organization.
Includes People with 
Disabilities in Testing 33.3% 27.3% 48.1% 56.3% 54.8% 58.2% 90.0% Accessibility 
Program Age No program 0-1 years 2-3 years 4-6 years 7-10 years 11-20 years 20+ years Continuous integration and accessibility testing 
Continuous integration (CI) is the practice of merging all developers' working copies to the shared mainline several times a day. Testing for accessibility as part of the CI process is an excellent way to fag issues early in the process to head of future bottlenecks. The survey revealed that 67.3%of organizations that practice continuous integration test for accessibility during the CI process. That's up from 56.0%in 2021.
The types of organizations that were most likely to perform accessibility testing as part of the CI process varied greatly. Two program characteristics that were of interest emerged. First, programs that were in their early stages were highly likely to have implemented accessibility testing in their CI process, with two	to six year old accessibility programs leading the way. Second, programs that include IAAP certifed personnel were more likely than the average to have implemented a CI testing process.
| Testing Process
Free accessibility testing tools 	
The majority of organizations-across all sizes, verticals, and maturity-use free tools. There are many free tools available, and despite their limitations, they can prove useful.

Do you use free accessibility tools?


Browser extensions and site scan / web crawl services were the most frequently used free tools. 
What type of free accessibility software or testing tools  (non-assistive technology) do you use? 
82.4% Browser extensions and page testers
28.8% 	Site scan or web crawl services
23.4% 	Automated testing technology that integrates with your CI/CD tool
22.7% 	Automated testing technology compatible with your test framework
22.5% 	Linting tools
14.5% 	CMS testing tools
13.6% 	API calls to a testing engine
11.9% 	Script based web monitoring for pages
6.6% 	Overlay based remediation tools
5.6% 	None of the above-we don't use free tools
5.6% 	Other
	What best describes your organization's use of overlay solutions? 
We are using them as our main compliance approach-3.6% 
We are using them as a way to buy time to implement code level fxes-5.5% 
We are experimenting with them-11.2% 

Assistive technology (AT)   for testing 
In order to ensure that a website or mobile app works with assistive technology, it should be tested with assistive technology. For more valuable insights, it is industry best practice for a person who uses AT on a daily basis to conduct this testing.
Most frequently used AT for testing 
1. 84.0%-Free screen reading software
(e. g., NVDA)
2. 64.5%-Mobile screen reading software
(e. g., VoiceOver, TalkBack)
3. 55.9%-Paid screen reading software
(e. g., JAWS)
4. 52.2%-Screen magnifcation / contrast
(e. g., ZoomText/Fusion)

Mobile apps are tested with AT and accessibility  system settings. 
58.1% of those in QA roles reported that they tested mobile	58.1% apps with assistive technology or accessibility system settings
such as high contrast mode, large text, and magnifcation. 	Yes 
This is a dip from 63.0% in 2021.
Overall accessibility program maturity rating for testing 
36.5%of those in QA roles rated their organization's accessibility testing gates or practices as "In Progress." Only 22.1%rated their development gates and practices as "Proactive".
| Accessibility Monitoring Tools
Most likely to have audited within the past year 
58.4% Work with an accessibility vendor
48.2% 	to 6 year old accessibility program
43.2% 	More than 5,000 employees
| Auditing the Accessibility Audit

90.0% of UX and Design professionals are actively  considering accessibility. 
Best practice dictates that thinking about accessibility should start before the product exists- and the survey participants agreed. Only 10.0%of those surveyed said they do not consider accessibility at all when designing. Two out of three UX professionals reported thinking about accessibility in the prototyping stage.
In which stages of the process do you actively consider accessibility?  (Check all that apply)

Despite this, 45.8% of Design professionals reported they do not get any feedback from people with disabilities. 
Many organizations make great eforts to include people with disabilities in their work. However, there is room for improvement.
Manual testing is most efective when the testing is conducted by a person who is a daily user of an AT like a screen reader. It is even more efective when people who are native users of AT conduct usability testing.
In which stages of the process do you get feedback from people with disabilities?  (Check all that apply)

Accessibility and design requirements 
The design requirementsThe design requirements included accessibility,included accessibility, but
and our team understoodour team did not understand how to meet thosehow to meet those requirements-45.9%.requirements-27.1%.The design requirements did not mention accessibility at all-27.0%.The survey asked UX and Design professionals to refect on their most recent project and select the statement that best described it:
Many still report a lack of accessibility understanding and training. 	The bad news: 54.1%of the time, teams did not understand how to meet accessibility requirements.
More than 40.0%rated their Design /UX team's accessibility knowledge as "Elementary."Partnering with an accessibility vendor results in a more accessible component library. 
The survey revealed that organizations that partnered with an accessibility vendor-even short term-leveraged that relationship to develop a more accessible component library.
Accessibility is included in most design requirements. 	The good news:   73.0% reported that accessibility was part of the design requirements, and nearly half reported that their team understood how to meet the accessibility requirements.Organizations that have customized their UI framework to make components more accessible 

	All	Partner with
an accessibility vendor

The good news is that 55.6% of organizations are verifying content accessibility before a new asset is published, which is up from 47.9% in 2021. 
Content publication practices and procedures 
The survey provided a glimpse into the operating procedures of Content Creation teams. It found that while many organizations are thinking about accessibility, they haven't always implemented appropriate practices and procedures.
39.7%of survey participants stated they had accessibility challenges caused by "too many content creators." This was especially true for those in Education (51.9%) and in large organizations with more than 1,000 employees (58.6%).
Without proper training-which 51.4%of all participants identifed as a challenge-it is difcult to ensure that all published content is accessible.
16.0% of Content Creators said that content is self published by the author with no checks for content accessibility.20.7% of Content Creators self check for accessibility before publishing.28.5% of Content Creators have someone else review the content before publishing, but do not checkfor accessibility.

The most commonly reported electronic document types: 

94.5% 
PDF 84.7% 
MS Word 76.0% 
MS PowerPoint 60.1% 
MS Excel 34.4% 
Google Docs PDF accessibility is a common area of focus among respondents. Survey results reveal
69.6%of respondents tag their PDFs for accessibility.
Use alternative (alt) text for images (down from 75.5% in 2021) 
72.3% 	Images that convey information should have alt text so that information is available to those who are blind, have low vision, or process audio information better than visual information.
Caption audio and video content (down from 62.2% in 2021) 
	61.5% 	Captions provide equal access to those who are deaf, hard of hearing,
or have difculty processing information they hear. They are also helpful for those who choose to mute their mobile devices.
Provide the same content on diferent channels (up from 50.0% 
54.2% 	in 2021) 
Duplicating content ensures that an organization's message is reaching as many of their users as possible, especially when the accessibility of diferent applications is a concern.
Use WCAG-compliant color contrast for images with text (up from 
50.6% 	43.9% in 2021) 
To meet WCAG 2.0 level A, there should be a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 for normal text and 3:1 for large text. To meet AAA guidelines, the ratios are 7:1 for normal text and 4.5:1 for large text.
Use CamelCase hashtags (up from 41.5% in 2021) 
48.2%  	To increase readability by people of all abilities, it is helpful to capitalizeeach word of a multi word hashtag (e.g., #CamelCaseHashtags vs.
#camelcasehashtags).
Note media type for URLs (up from 14.6% in 2021) 
	31.3%  	One "above and beyond" feature is to help your users predict the
outcome of clicking on a social media link. This can be as simple as adding [VIDEO] or [PDF] after the link.
Provide the same content in diferent formats (up from 22.0%  
30.1% 	in 2021) Another way to go "above and beyond" for users is to provide the
same content in diferent formats. This gives them a choice to consume content in a way that works best for them. An example would be having the same information available in a video and as an article on your website and linking to both options.
Use audio description for videos (up from 12.2% in 2021) 
20.5%  	Audio description is a secondary audio track where a narrator
describes the action on screen so those who are blind or have low vision can access the information more fully.
Verify that shared or retweeted content is accessible (up from 
	19.3%  	12.2% in 2021) 
While most social media managers do their best to share
accessible content, they often draw the line at verifying third party created content.

Video content, webinars, and live-streams 
Captions are important for those who are deaf or hard of hearing, but they are also helpful to those with cognitive disabilities, and English language learners. The survey found that 61.1%of respondents caption their video content (no change from 2021). Exactly how they caption their videos varies.

Level Access, eSSENTIAL Accessibility, G3ict, and IAAP recommend downloading 3PlayMedia's State of Captioning Reportfor in depth data about captioning.
Webinars and live streamed videos are becoming much more accessible, but the percentage dipped this year.
Of the organizations who host webinars and live streamed videos, 11.9%stated that their events were not accessible at all. This compares to only 7.5%in 2021.
Inclusive Practice 2021 2022 Platform accessible to screen reader users52.7% 40.5% Live closed captioning69.9% 58.3% Transcript following the event52.7% 42.9% Accessible to keyboard only users38.7% 35.7% Webinar slides available in an accessible format57.0% 25.0% Live sign language interpreter21.5% 20.2% Having a sign language interpreter ensures that the most accurate information is being conveyed to the Deaf community. This is especially true if your organization uses a Certifed Deaf Interpreter (CDI).
The majority of organizations are satisfied with their processes for  dealing with accessibility complaints and feedback. 
50.6% said their organization has	56.1% felt that accessibility
a documented process	complaints are resolved
for handling accessibility	in a timely manner. complaints and feedback.
Dedicated support for people with disabilities is on the rise. In 20.2%of organizations, everyone is trained to assist people with disabilities.
In an additional 52.8%of organizations,That's a total of 73.0%of organizations there's at least one person on staf trainedthat have dedicated staf to support to assist people with disabilities.people with disabilities.
The position that manages and documents accessibility complaints  varies widely. 
No clear owner for accessibility complaints emerged in this year's survey.
In the slight majority of cases, accessibility complaints are managed along with another responsibility.
A position that manages accessibility feedback and other accessibility duties-35.2% 
A position that manages accessibility feedback and other Product team duties-15.1% 
In 24.6%of cases, accessibility complaints are managed by those who manage general customer feedback.
| Customer Service and Accessibility Feedback
Although the majority of organizations reported spending up to 40 hours with internal teams working to resolve the complaint and bring their properties into compliance, it's worth noting that nearly 20.0%said they spent more than 100 hours. Including accessibility in the budget will help mitigate some of the fnancial risk posed by lawsuits and demand letters.
| Lawsuits and Litigation

2 This statistic may not refect the job market at large based on the self selecting nature of the survey.
| Human Resources and Diversity and Inclusion Programs

The majority of buyers want accessible technology.  
The survey found that 73.7%of organizations have prioritized buying a product or solution because of its accessibility.
Only 6.5%said they do not ask vendors to provide proof of accessibility before purchasing a product or solution (down from 9.2%in 2021).
58.7% 
required a VPAT or other conformance report.51.1% 
asked questions about compliance with	accessibility standards.	
20.7% 
requested a trial of the product by employees with disabilities.

Accessibility is called out as a deciding factor nearly 40.0% of the time. 
In the 2022 survey, 38.6%reported that their product's level of accessibility was called out as a reason for purchase.
| Buying and Selling Accessible Technology

Training gaps are impacting Design / UX and Development teams. 
While training has largely been made available, it is unclear if this training is being completed or if the training achieves the desired impact. A commonly reported concern in the explanatory notes for responses in this section is that there is no learning management process in place to verify that training has been delivered and is efective.
In that regard, asking personnel to be certifed by an independent professional organization such as IAAP helps maintain and expand the knowledge and skill set of those who are developing products.
| Training, Education, and Certifcation
Professional certifications communicate commitment to accessibility. 
With more than 4,600 certifed professionals, IAAP is establishing itself as the certifcation of reference for accessibility. The table below shows year to year progress in notoriety and actual adoption by organizations. With four exams covering specifc accessibility job profles with distinct Bodies of Knowledge, IAAP's certifcations constitute a robust roadmap for building accessibility skills.
IAAP Certification 2020 2021 2022 Have considered IAAP Certifcation21.8% 24.5% 30.3% Have not considered IAAP Certifcation36.0% 32.5% 26.7% Already have IAAP certifed personnel  15.8% 19.9% 23.4% Have never heard of IAAP certifcation26.4% 23.1% 19.6% The data revealed benefits to having certified personnel. 
Accessibility knowledge, skill building, and transfer of expertise result in enhanced accessibility for products and services. Organizations with IAAP certifed employees or contractors are

more likely to:
• Have completed an accessibility audit in the past six months-61.5%vs.
56.2%overall
• Have updated their UI component library to refect accessibility best practices-
86.4%vs.77.8%overall
• Rate their design practices as "Proactive"-
32.8%vs.23.1%overall
• Consider accessibility in the earliest planning stages of the development lifecycle-57.1%vs.40.4%
• Have better accessibility training programs. Organizations with IAAP certifed employees or contractors ranked training as the number seven challenge, whereas it was in the top three for all other subgroups.

About eSSENTIAL Accessibility + Level Access 
eSSENTIAL Accessibility and Level Access empower organizationswith the advanced software and expert managed services they need to create accessible and legally compliant websites, mobile apps, digital products, and documents. Our mission is to achieve digital equality for all users by ensuring technology is accessible to people with disabilities and the growing aging population.
Why partner with eSSENTIAL Accessibility + Level Access? 
• Over 20 years in digital accessibility and only digital accessibility-an unparalleled history in helping customers achieve and maintain compliance
• A comprehensive suite of software, expert services, and training solutions
• Experienced testers, including many with disabilities who use assistive technologies
Learn more about digital accessibility products and services at levelaccess.com  
or essentialaccessibility.com. 
Connect with us: eSSENTIAL Accessibility Level Access info@essentialaccessibility.cominfo@levelaccess.comAbout G3ict 
G3ict's objectives and global outreach are aligned with the dispositions of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) on the accessibility of Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) and Assistive Technologies.
What does G3ict do? 
• Promote awareness of digital accessibility and of efective public policies, private sector initiatives, and accessibility standards;
• Support advocates and policy makers with capacity building programs, policy development tools and benchmarking;
• Facilitate and share good practices and innovation in accessible and assistive technologies;
• Foster harmonization and standardization to achieve lower costs and interoperability on a global scale;
• Defne and promote the accessibility profession through networking, education and certifcation.
For more information, please visit g3ict.org. 
Connect with us: 

About IAAP 
The International Association of Accessibility Professionals (IAAP) is a not for proft association focused on advancing the accessibility profession globally through networking, education, and certifcation in order to enable the creation of accessible products, content, and services for persons with disabilities. For more information, please visit  accessibilityassociation.org. 
Connect with us: 
1 This statistic may not refect the job market at large based on the self selecting nature of the survey.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

2

2



7 | The State of Accessibility Programs

7 | The State of Accessibility Programs

7 | The State of Accessibility Programs

2

2

2

13 | Goals for Accessibility Programs in 2022

13 | Goals for Accessibility Programs in 2022

13 | Goals for Accessibility Programs in 2022

16 | Challenges for Accessibility Programs

16 | Challenges for Accessibility Programs

16 | Challenges for Accessibility Programs

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

19 | Accessibility Program Maturity

26 | Product Development

26 | Product Development

26 | Product Development

30 | Accessibility Testing Tools

30 | Accessibility Testing Tools

2

 34

 34

 32 | Accessibility Testing Tools

35 | User Experience and Inclusive Design

35 | User Experience and Inclusive Design

35 | User Experience and Inclusive Design

38 | Content Creation

38 | Content Creation

38 | Content Creation

 34

 34

 43 | Content Creation

2

2

2







