Table of Contents
What is accessibility?
Understanding disability and impairment
Recognizing exclusion sparks innovation
What is inclusive design?
Accessibility principles to consider in your media and marketing
Accessible Marketing in search
Get started easily with Microsoft 365 accessibility features

Modern Marketing
is Accessible Marketing
Your how-to-guide to help reach and connect with your diverse audience Microsoft Advertising | 1
As a marketer or business person, you've thought about all kinds of ways to increase the reach of your organization. Many businesses however, overlook
the large audience of people with disabilities.
Contents
Bottom line? If you aren't doing Accessible
Marketing, it's time to start. Whether you're
04 What is accessibility?
already working on Accessible Marketing, or just
beginning to learn about it, this eBook will help you 09 Understanding disability and impairment
understand why Modern Marketing is Accessible
Marketing. It also provides tips and tools to help 15 Recognizing exclusion sparks innovation
you on the path to accessibility.
16 What is inclusive design?
We've learned a lot about how
implementing accessibility best-
21 Accessibility principles to consider in your media and marketing
practices to digital marketing can
32 Accessible Marketing in search
help make your marketing more
accessible to all people, including
36 Get started easily with Microsoft 365 accessibility features
those living with disabilities.
Connecting with and considering people living
with disabilities enables you to better solve for their challenges. A few practical steps can make your
digital marketing more inclusive and accessible -
immediately increasing your reach and revenue.
2 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 3


Why accessibility
matters
Did you know that over 1 billion1 people
worldwide live with a disability? Yet
they're often excluded from connecting
with brands and digital marketing
due to access barriers. It may surprise
you, but their exclusion impacts us all.
Without the voices and contributions
What is accessibility?
of people with varied experiences, we
aren't able to reach our full potential
on any given project, initiative or idea.
Accessibility is when products, services, environments, Digital inclusion provides opportunities
digital media and marketing are designed so everyone and access to services, products, data,
- including people living with permanent, temporary or information and education for all.
The challenges of people living with
situational disabilities - can fully experience them.
disabilities are real and the business
opportunity they represent is large. As
A wide range of disabilities affect the way that people access marketing, including physical marketers, we have the opportunity to
disabilities like loss of mobility, blindness and deafness or learning difficulties like dyslexia.
recognize exclusions, solve for them,
If you don't design for accessibility, you exclude a large segment of the global population and make a difference in the lives
who could be your customers.
of many people.
1. https://www.who.int/disabilities/en/
4 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 5

What does
Accessibility is a human imperative
accessibility in
Empowering everyone is the right thing to do for many reasons. To begin with, accessibility is a human right. All people should have the ability to get marketing mean?
what they want and need with equal opportunity and safety. Accessibility is essential. The right to enjoy meaningful participation in the world both Accessibility in marketing is
off and online involves easy access. The degree to which a person can about making it easy for everyone to
access opportunities impacts the quality of their life. Accessibility empowers experience your marketing, receive and
the widest range of people to unlock their abilities, and live life fully.
understand your communication, and
Inaccessibility negatively impacts all aspects of life including economic, have the opportunity to invest in or
social and mental wellness. Many countries around the world require become a fan of your product, service or
web accessibility - it's the law. See the full list here: aka.ms/seefulllisthere.
brand. To do this effectively, accessibility
must be built into the beginning of every
communication, process, product and
Accessibility is a business imperative
service rather than bolting it on later.
This might mean providing information
The more people you reach the more you can serve, so accessibility in alternate formats, such as captions
is good business. Designing with accessibility in mind goes beyond or audio descriptions for video and more
compliance by providing more effective customer interactions, accessible emails and websites. It also
increased productivity and innovation. We are on a journey to includes enabling optimized experiences
understand the full impact that inclusion has on productivity when using assistive technologies -
and innovation, but one thing is clear: designing for inclusion such as screen readers.
means everyone can do and achieve more.
6 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 7

Business value of accessibility
Understanding disability and impairment
Accessible communication increases audience reach For most of the 20th century, the definition
to reflect the point of interaction between
of disability remained the same. But
a person and their environment, it's now
Reach wider audience
recently, the concept of what disability is
considered an accessibility problem.
Attract and reach a wider pool of potential
has changed dramatically. It's important to
customers of all abilities by making it easy
understand this change in order to
to access your marketing content
see how society impacts those living
with disabilities and impairments.
Increase business impact
The larger the audience you can serve through
In 1980 the World Health Organization
accessible websites and communications,
defined disability as 'an attribute of a
the higher revenue impact is possible
person'. They recently redefined it to mean
'a mismatch between the needs of an
1980
Achieve compliance
individual and a product, service, or social
Disability is a
personal issue
Leverage built-in assistive technologies and support structure offered'. This is revolutionary. The
services to meet requirements
distinction is: 'impairments' are problems
that may prevent people from doing
something. 'Disability' is the additional
disadvantage added by a society that
treats 'impairments' as abnormal, which
An example of designing for accessibility
unnecessarily excluding people from full
Imagine if a town was designed with wheelchairs in participation in society. Why does this shift
mind, without stairs or escalators. If we designed matter so much? Historically, disability
Today
environments this way, wheelchair users would be as was defined as the result of an individual's
Disability is a mismatch
independent as everyone else. It is society that puts between needs and offerings
condition - it was their problem and
barriers up for people by not making environments responsibility. By changing the definition
accessible to everyone. Marketers can make a
positive impact by solving for these exclusions
in our own campaigns and storytelling.
8 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 9
15% of all people around the world live with disability.1
That's 1 billion people, including:
United States2
United Kingdom3
22%
The unemployment rate for this demographic
12%
1. https://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/report/en/; 2x
is 2X higher1 for anyone else.
Think about what an incredible resource for innovation this overlooked demographic could be.
Australia5
Europe4
25%
18%
2. https://www.cdc.gov/media/images/releases/2015/p0730-us-disability.jpg;
3. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/321594/disability-prevalence.pdf;
4. https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1569&context=gladnetcollect;
5. https://www.and.org.au/pages/disability-statistics.html
1. https://www.marketplace.org/2017/07/21/life/people-disabilities-unemployment-rate-still-pretty-high
10 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 11
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Touch
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
23M+
in the U.S.
One arm
Arm injury
New parent
could benefit
Persona
from a solution
See
designed for
spectrum
2M
13M
8M
=
those with a
people living
people
people in the US
While some people have
permanent
with appendage experience an
who experience
permanent disabilities,
disability
loss in the US1
injury to an
a situational
almost everyone experiences
Distracted
appendage2
impairment2
Blind
Cataract
Driver
temporary impairment or
situational impairment at
Hear
some point in their life. For
Accessibility for few becomes usability for many example, as people age they
can experience increased
natural challenges either in
vision, hearing, or mobility.
4 areas of disability to consider
Deaf
Ear infection
Bartender
We refer to this range of
experience as a persona
spectrum.
Speak
Visual
Hearing
Motor
Cognitive
Non-verbal
Laryngitis
Heavy accent
1. https://www.amputee-coalition.org/limb-loss-resource-center/resources-filtered/resources-by-topic/limb-loss-statistics/limb-loss-statistics/
2. https://aka.ms/MSInclusiveManual
12 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 13


Recognizing
exclusion sparks
innovation
Consider how many of your potential custom-
ers may live with a disability or impairment
that impacts how they interact with your dig-
ital marketing. As a marketer, you have the
opportunity to recognize these exclusions and
create changes that make a difference. Rec-
ognizing and removing barriers to your mar-
keting represents an incredible opportunity to
expand the reach of your brand -
and it's easier than you think.
70% of disabilities are not visible1
Exclusion happens when we solve problems
based on our own biases. To design inclusive
solutions and campaigns, we must get close
An unconscious bias many people share,
of our work and collaboration increasing-
to our customers. Proximity drives empathy,
is that disability is something we can see
ly happening at a distance. In addition,
which uncovers insights. That's where the
with our eyes. For example, a person is in a
we often market to or communicate with
'Aha!' moments for invention arise from.
wheelchair or missing a limb. But the truth
people on the phone, via video, or in text,
is, it's not always obvious when someone
when doing search marketing. As a result,
By exploring what someone goes through that
lives with a disability. In fact, the majority
we don't always have insight into the expe-
causes them to be excluded from accomplishing
of disabilities aren't visible. Chronic illness,
rience or context of the person we're com-
or experiencing something, you uncover oppor-
cognitive or mobility issues, vision loss, and
municating with-including whether a dis-
tunities to create solutions. Inevitably, when you many other disabilities often have no visi-ability is present, or what technology they
design human-centered solutions, they're more
ble indicators. In today's landscape, much
use to support a disability.
accessible, and reach many.
1. http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20170605-the-hidden-challenges-of-invisible-disabilities
14 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 15

What is inclusive design?
Inclusive design is an approach born out of digital environments, that learns from and enables the full range of human diversity. For marketers, inclusive design means creating marketing that's accessible to all people, including those with disabilities and impairments.
To learn more about inclusive design, click here: aka.ms/InslvDesign.
At Microsoft, we focus on three human-center design principles: Recognize
Solve for one,
Learn from
exclusions
extend to many
diversity
Building it in, not bolting it on
Design for the edges is an approach that optimizes innovation for as many people as possible. It goes beyond the idea that things should be designed for the 'average'
person. Instead, the idea is to optimize for the full range of human characteristics, traits, abilities and interests. When modern life is set up in an accessible way for people living with impairments, they won't be excluded or restricted.
16 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 17

Banking on accessible design
"If you don't design for
A wonderful example of accessible design in action, accessibility, it's like saying
is TD Bank Group, headquartered in Toronto, Canada.
They are committed to accessibility and believe empow-to every fifth person who
ering a diverse workforce drives innovation and helps cre-walks in your door, 'I don't
ate inclusive customer products. That's a definite business advantage in an industry that banks on good customer really want your business.'"
service. Their philosophy is: the more they can bring different perspectives, skill sets, and unique abilities togeth-Bert Floyd
er in one team, the better they'll be at creating products Team Lead of Assistive Technologies,
and services that help address customers' varied needs-
TD Bank, Canada
and the faster they'll get them to the market. This helps their reputation for great customer service to all. To com-plement work done in the bank's Assistive Technologies Lab, they are rolling out Office 365, and Windows 10 to empower everyone with the built-in accessibility features.
To learn more about the TD Bank Group, click here:
aka.ms/TDAmeritrade.
18 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 19

Designing for accessibility leads
to innovation that impacts everyone
10 Accessibility principles to consider
For example, Microsoft Learning Tools
comprehension for students of all
in your media and marketing
began as a startup concept during
abilities, leading to test scores that were
the 2015 Hackathon. It was designed
10 percent higher than students who
The following pages cover ten principles to help you get started building to help dyslexic students read. Today,
didn't use Immersive Reader. Read more
accessibility into and across your media and marketing efforts. The result Immersive Reader is available in over 30
about leveling the playing field with the
of our ongoing work, these principles incorporate helpful tips we gathered languages and is used by over 13 million
Microsoft Learning Tools eBook here:
from participating in Microsoft's Accessibility Summit and consulting with active users monthly. More importantly,
aka.ms/MSebooktools.
our accessibility experts. These principles serve as solid building blocks to it has increased reading speed and
help you on your journey to make your marketing more accessible.
In the past you had to adapt to the world.
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
In the future the world will adapt to you.
1 Content writing and structure
6 Color contrast and shapes
When accessibility principles are part of
product and service design, inclusion is built-
2 URL & link text & description
7 Keyboard only navigation
in rather than added on. The image to the
left illustrates this idea in the physical world: a ramp integrated into a building design rather
3 Text readability tips
8 Form prompts
than a separate ramp, or no ramp. In the
digital world it means connecting people to
4 Accessibility fonts
9 Call-to-action buttons
information and others through customizable
interfaces that adapt to their needs. When
5 Images and videos
10 Event space and registration
societies and organizations are inclusive in
their approach to accessibility, they design
products and services that can be seamlessly
used by everyone.
20 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 21


1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
1 Content writing and structure
2 URL, Link text and descriptions
Being intentional with your content structure and content writing is very important to Link descriptions are an easy and important element to focus on for accessible content. For those using only a keyboard to access content. This is usually people with vision loss, who example, the phrase "Click here" can be difficult to interpret for someone using a screen rely on a screen reader or narrator to make web pages audible. Clear writing that's easy reader, even if it precedes more specific information. Put yourself in the shoes of a person to read and has a logical structure is also extremely important for those with cognitive or with vision loss, and imagine all the 'Click here' calls-to-action you come across on any given learning disabilities, along with everyone in a hurry or on a mobile screen. Remember to day. They don't always explain what the person gets for 'clicking here'. To make a 'Click use clean, semantic markup for headings, paragraphs, lists, block quotes, etc. Headings are here' link more accessible you can write it like this: 'Click here to access today's weather.'
also a critical element that helps make navigating content easier.
It can also be shortened to 'Today's weather'. In some cases, you may want to precede a linked phrase with 'Get' or 'Get info about', such as 'Get info about today's weather'. As with Headings
all written content, keep it streamlined with as few extra words as possible. For example, Use heading tags: <h1> to <h6>
'Today's weather' rather than 'Get info about today's weather.'
Make sure headings follow correct hierarchy
22 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 23
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
3 Text readability tips
4 Accessible fonts
Make text easy to read. This seems simple enough, but there are nuances that make a big Sans-Serif fonts are preferred for accessibility. They are easier to read for those with difference. For example, centered text can be difficult for users with cognitive or learning vision loss, cognitive disabilities and anyone reading on a digital device.
disabilities. That said, you can center single line headlines above content. In addition, content that wraps to more than 2 lines should be aligned left. You should also steer clear of copy that is justified center or aligned right and avoid text in all capital letters.
Source: aka.ms/UXmovement
Sans-Serif fonts don't use decorative details and are typically have consistent line widths. Sans Serif fonts include Arial, Calibri, Segoe and Franklin Gothic Book.
Serif fonts are not as easy to read due to varying thickness and decorative details as seen on the curve Centered Headline
Left-aligned Headline
of the 'f' to the left. Serif fonts include Times New Left aligned paragraph text does
Left aligned paragraph text does
Roman, Georgia, and Book Antiqua.
not combine well with centered
not combine well with centered
text. Unsymmetrical line lengths
text. Unsymmetrical line lengths
Font tips
of the paragraph can give the
of the paragraph can give the
• Use font size of 12 points or larger
headline the appearance that
headline the appearance that
• Ensure a 4.5:1 color contrast for the background it's slightly off-center.
it's slightly off-center.
• Avoid italics, fancy script, or decorative fonts with curly edges
• Use font color that contrasts with background
Source: aka.ms\webaimfonts
24 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 25


1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
5 Images and video
6 Color, contrast and shapes
Be sure not to use color alone to differentiate things. For example, green, yellow, and red are often used to indicate project status. It's more effective to include words such as 'on track',
'at risk', and 'blocking' along with those colors to help colorblind users. Something else to Closed captions must be
consider is how often you try to convey meaning with color alone. That's a barrier for people included for video. They help
who are colorblind unless they're using the Windows 10 and color filter feature to help them.
people with vision loss, those
Another way to further support colorblind people, is to add a shape to denote meaning. To watching in noisy places, and
learn more about color filters, click here: aka.ms/Win10colorfilters.
those whose language is different
that the language in the video.
Source: aka.ms/webaimcontrastchecker
Audio descriptions are needed
to narrate actions on screen. An
Color contrast
example is, "A man walks into an
office building."
Use a 4.5:1 contrast ratio for normal text and 3:1 for large text. Large text is defined as 14 point or larger (typically 18.66px) and bold, or 18
point or larger (typically 24px). Make sure your text has a high enough Additional images and video tips
color contrast with the background color. There are a number of good
• Video and audio should not auto-play
contrast checkers online. Try this contrast checker:
aka.ms/webaimcontrastchecker.
• Media requires controls to allow the user to stop/start playback
• Audio files, such as podcasts, should include downloadable transcripts Don't rely on color alone
• All images must have an ALT attribute
Links should use more than just color for differentiation. Icons and alerts
• If the image is decorative (doesn't add to the content) the Alt attribute should be accompanied by descriptive text.
can be empty (i.e. Alt="")
• Images that convey meaning should have clear Alt descriptions
• Don't use the word "picture" or "image" in Alt text Source: aka.ms/accessibletranscripts
26 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 27



1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
7 Keyboard only navigation
8 Form prompts
People who are unable to use a mouse or see the screen need to access all website Another common accessibility oversight is when form field labels are eliminated and only content and functionality through their keyboard alone. To make your website feature placeholder text. This adversely affects keyboard users and those with cognitive accessible by keyboards it's important to allow users to: 1) use the tab key to follow impairments. Keyboard users and cognitively impaired people face more challenges with along with where the keyboard focus is, 2) navigate to all interactive elements, and prompts built into forms. A few things to keep in mind to make your 3) bypass navigation if there are many links. All aspects of a site must be available for form prompts accessible:
keyboard navigation. All items that get focus must have an indicator, such as a dashed
• Don't replace form labels with placeholder text outline, that shows when they are active as shown in this image below. To learn more about keyboard-only navigation read this article: aka.ms/KeyboardAccessibility.
• Light gray placeholder text has poor color contrast against most backgrounds
• Not all screen readers can read placeholder text aloud Source: aka.ms/NielsenNormanGroupkeyboard
1
12
14
13
28 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 29


1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
12
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
Navigate 10 Accessibility Principles
9 Call-to-action buttons
10 Marketing event space and registration
In some cases, call-to-action buttons don't include all the information required for screen readers. To make sure your call-to-action buttons are accessible, be sure to include Ensure venue accessibility
additional information in the "aria-label" attribute.
The venue should provide a number of things to make it accessible including: specific parking allocations, braille signage on amenities, automatic doors at entrances, access to elevators if venue is multi-level, wheelchair accessible bathrooms.
Language to include during the registration process It's important to include language in your registration information-
something along the lines of: "We strive to create a welcoming and accessible environment for all attendees. If you require an accommodation for a disability please contact [Name] at [Contact information] by
[Date- a minimum of 2 weeks prior to the event]".
Floor plan considerations
Make sure there's enough space in the aisles for wheelchair access and service dogs. If you have an elevated stage for presenters, include a ramp with railings. To avoid segregating those with disabilities to the sides and back of the room, leave open spaces at tables or in rows throughout the room for wheelchairs.
Auditory and vision considerations
Create auditory queues at registration. Avoid low lighting for your event, as it makes it hard to see ASL interpreters. If your event has low lighting, make sure the interpreter is well lit. Provide real-time captioning of all event speakers.
Source: CELA Accessibility Events Word Doc titled, "Accessible Events Guide"
30 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 31
Accessible Marketing in search PDFs and PowerPoint
marketing material
Over the following few pages you'll find simple ways to optimize each of these 4 campaign categories:
There are numerous ways you can optimize PDFs and PowerPoint files in order to make them more accessible. Here are some other simple adjustments you can make:
PDFs and PowerPoint presentation
Search for friendly file-names for PowerPoint and PDF documents Write-protect documents so it's difficult for others to edit or
Shopping campaign
add links to them
Optimize keyword titles
Add alt-tags for images and charts within the document
Organic search
Complete the description field - this is the meta description within SERPs (Search Engine Result Pages)
Add company name in Author Field
Video
Complete additional metadata fields in Adobe Acrobat Link to the document wherever it's published and include backlinks with your target keywords
For more information on PDF accessibility click here:
aka.ms/PDFAccessibility
32 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 33
Take advantage of
Organic search
Shopping Campaign features
There are several things you can do to make your organic search marketing more accessible, including:
Optimizing the feed content within your shopping campaigns and shopping feeds Use Alt-Text fields to describe images and videos provides valuable context for search engines to index against. It also makes your feed content more accessible to people with disabilities. Here are ways Optimize and create friendly URLs and image names you can optimize your shopping feeds:
To add additional context for Search Engines, include schema mark-up data on page and for images and videos.
Perform shopping feed optimization at the product level This also improves the knowledge pane, which can be read Include a title along with product details
out loud as the featured snippet
Use relevant descriptions with the most important data at the beginning Video
Include size, color, and pattern \for products when applicable Optimizing video content makes videos more engaging for viewers and more readable by search engines. Here are some simple ways For more information about how to create and organize feed files, click here:
to improve search engine accessibility while making your content
aka.ms/CreateFeedFiles.
more accessible to visually impaired people:
Create and provide an accurate video transcript on page when possible
Use open captions and closed captions to improve
engagement
Ensure text file for closed-caption is attached to the video player, which is readable by search engines 34 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 35
Microsoft 365 Accessibility feature sampling Creating accessible content
Office 365 is a clear example of built-in accessibility, designed to meet Vision
Hearing
Mobility
the needs of people around the world with different abilities. The Narrator/Braille Beta
Visual Notifications
Sticky, filter, toggle keys
Office 365 accessibility features offer simple solutions that enable High Contrast
Closed Captions
On Screen Keyboard
marketers to build basic accessibility in from the beginning of your Color Filters
Mono Audio
PowerPoint Designer
Seeing AI
Translator
Eye Control
workstreams rather than trying to bolt it on later. These accessible Magnifier
Stream
Dictation
products empower people and organization, increase productivity and unlock creativity for everyone. To get a good overview of the Microsoft 365 accessibility features, take a look at this video: Learn more about vision
Learn more about hearing
Learn more about mobility
accessibility tools
accessibility tools
accessibility tools
aka.ms/O365Accessibilitytraining.
aka.ms/visionaccessibilitytools
aka.ms/hearingaccessibilitytools
aka.ms/mobilityaccessibilitytools
Get started easily with
Neurodiversity
Learning
Mental Health
Microsoft 365 accessibility features
Turn Off Notifications
Immersive Reader
Simplify and
Learning Tools,
Text Suggestions
personalize Windows
To the right are some highlights of the accessible features Read Aloud, and
OneNote Outlook Tasks
Reading Mode
Reading View
Automatic Rules
in Microsoft 365. To explore over 100 available features, Researcher
Focus Assist
Reading View
click here: aka.ms/MSaccessibilityfeatures.
Quiet Hours
Editor
Focus Assist
Inking
To learn how to use these features, click here:
Editor
aka.ms/HowtouseFeatures.
Learn more about neurodiversity
Learn more about learning
Learn more about mental
accessibility tools
accessibility tools
health accessibility tools
aka.ms/neurodiversityaccessibilitytools
aka.ms/learningaccessibilitytools
aka.ms/mentalhealthaccessibilitytools
Additional support information for all features can be found here: aka.ms/microsoftaccessibilityfeatures.
36 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 37


Windows 10 eye gaze control
Windows 10 PCs can now be controlled with your eyes. Eye control enables people with mobility impairment such as ALS & quadriplegia to use eye tracking technology to control their mouse pointer, navigate online, type with an on-screen keyboard and communicate with people using text-to-speech. All you need is a Tobii USB camera-around $160 USD.
Microsoft translator
Microsoft Translator services can help you create inclusive presentations using PowerPoint. You can translate text, pictures and more into 60+ languages and can add subtitles that appear as you speak. This is a great feature not only for the hearing-impaired community, but also foreign language speakers.
38 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 39


Accessibility Checker
This is the #1 accessibility tool
for all content and is easy to use.
The Accessibility Checker allows users to check the accessibility of their material throughout Microsoft 365, in order to create more accessible content. This feature is easily discoverable in Word, Excel, PowerPoint, OneNote, Outlook, and more. We enhanced the Accessibility Checker to streamline the process of creating quality content that's accessible to people with disabilities. It also utilizes AI to make intelligent suggestions for improvements. For more information visit: aka.ms/Inclusionworkplace.
How it works
Before sharing content, you can run the Accessibility Checker to find and fix any issues that might make your content difficult for people with disabilities to use. Select 'Check Accessibility' under the 'Review' tab to get started. The checker analyzes your document, reveals accessibility issues and provides specific recommendations within your document about how to fix accessibility errors and create a more accessible piece of content.
To learn how to find and use the Accessibility Checker, click here:
aka.ms/Accessibility-checker.
Accessibility Checker 2018 updates
• Color contrast detection
• Simplified Alt text
• Removed detection of headings
• Reading order in PowerPoint
• More efficient fixes
• Additional templates
• Add objects as decorative
40 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 41


Accessible emails in Outlook
At least 12 million1 people in the U.S. use a screen reader, a screen magnifier, or braille to read email. Making all emails accessible ensures that when you send email to a broad distribution you'll also reach and connect with millions of people in your audience who have limited or no vision. Nearly all assistive technology is designed to work well with HTML, rather than plain text. With HTML, your messages can include formatted links with display text, lists, headings, and Alt Text for images.
Watch this video: aka.ms/EmailAccessibilityTools to see how you can make your email messaging more accessible, regardless of what email program you use.
Accessible PowerPoint presentations
PowerPoint has become easier and more efficient for authoring and reading slides and speaker notes. It's very accessible for customers using a keyboard or assistive technology, including screen readers. This includes reliable High Contrast even in menus and galleries, proofing, comments, and co-authoring. Watch this video: aka.ms/createaccessiblePPT. To discover how to create more accessible slides. To learn about designing slides for people with Dyslexia, check out this video:
aka.ms/AccessiblePPTforDyslexia.
1. https://support.office.com/en-gb/article/Video-Improve-email-accessibility-ebf3730a-18f8-4b57-81d1-730086231775#ID0EAABAAA=Transcript
42 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 43


Stream
Microsoft Stream is an intelligent video service that makes it easy to create, securely share, and interact with video. Auto-captioning speech to text, auto-generated closed-captions, and face detection features create more ways to find and interact with videos-so everyone can access relevant content quickly and easily. Stream also makes it easy to search closed-captioning, helping people who are blind or have vision loss find exactly what they want. Read more about Video and Stream here: aka.ms/Streaminfo.
Accessible Excel workbooks
People who are blind or have vision loss can understand your data more easily if you create your Excel workbooks and charts with accessibility in mind. Prebuilt Excel templates can also help save time and improve the accessibility of the content that you create.
To discover how to make your Excel workbooks more accessible, watch this video about Excel workbook templates: aka.ms/
AccessibleExceltemplate.
44 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 45


Closed-captions
Adding closed-captions makes your presentation accessible to a larger audience, including people with hearing loss and those who speak languages other than the language used in your video. Now you can add closed-captions or subtitles to any video and audio file in your PowerPoint presentations. Read more about Closed-caption here: aka.ms/CloseCaptionPPT.
Video and audio transcription
Automated transcription services using AI technology can be used while viewing a video or listening to an audio file. A full transcript (improving both accessibility and search) appears in the viewer, which supports over 320 different file types. This helps people use their personal video and audio assets, as well as collaborate better with others.
46 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 47

Automatic Alternative Text (Alt Text)
This feature leverages intelligent image analysis powered by the Microsoft Computer Vision Cognitive Service to automatically suggest descriptions for photos, objects and other images in PowerPoint, Word ad Outlook-without requiring the use of a content creator. AI-based suggestions help you save time and ensure your media-rich content is accessible to viewers who are blind or have vision loss and use screen readers. Learn more about Microsoft Computer Vision Cognitive Services here:
aka.ms/MSComputerVision.
The Alt Text on a document informs users that the description has been automatically generated. It provides a confidence rating regarding the accuracy of the image description. In addition, Alt Text isn't needed for decorative images, and it's not necessary to repeat content already included on the page. To manually add or change Alt Text, go to the right click menu in Office. This placement makes it easy to check auto-generated descriptions for accuracy and provide alt text on charts, graphs, and other media. Machine learning algorithms will continue to improve Automatic Alt Text over time.
To learn how to improve accessibility with Alt. Text, watch this video:
aka.ms/AddAltText.
To learn how to check document accessibility in Word, watch this video:
aka.ms/DocumentAccessibilitychecker.
For more information, read this article: aka.ms/AltTextforGraphics.
48 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 49

Key takeaways
Resources for your journey towards accessibility In this eBook we explored many aspects of Accessible Marketing. The upshot?
Learning opportunity: webinar series
Making your marketing media accessible is a necessary and powerful journey Watch our Accessible Marketing webinar on-demand, here: to help you reach and connect with your diverse audience.
aka.ms/ModernMarketingWebinar.
Interested in more in-depth learning opportunities? Explore these webinars:
aka.ms/AccessibilityWebinarSeries.
Additional resources
Guidelines for web content accessibility:
Screen readers for testing your
aka.ms/AccessibilityGuildlinesWeb
content:
The more you know about
Excellent resource for all things web
• NV Access (NVDA):
aka.ms/NonVisualAccess
accessibility, the easier it
accessibility: aka.ms/WebAIM
• JAWS: aka.ms/JAWS
will be to build it in from the
Community-driven tips and tricks:
• Narrator: aka.ms/
beginning of any campaign,
https://aka.ms/A11yProject
Win10Narraotorguide
product or service.
3 things you can do now
Support for your accessibility questions
We have a dedicated accessibility support desk for people with disabilities. You can also Start using the accessibility checker in all your documents learn more by following us on Twitter @MSFTEnable or through our Accessibility portal:
aka.ms/AccessibilityPortal.
Apply the 10 accessibility principles
Become an accessibility champion in your organization 50 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 51

"If you aren't building accessibility in,
you are probably building it out."
Jenny Lay-Flurrie
Microsoft Chief Accessibility Officer
52 | Modern Marketing is Accessible Marketing Microsoft Advertising | 53
Document Outline
* What is accessibility?
* Understanding disability and impairment
* Recognizing exclusion sparks innovation
* What is inclusive design?
* Accessibility principles to consider in your media and marketing
* Accessible Marketing in search
* Get started easily with Microsoft 365 accessibility features
