9-13-2021 
Amazon Echo Show: Quick Sheets 
These Quick Sheets are meant to assist in the set up and use of your Amazon Echo Show. Topics are listed in alphabetical order.  
GOING HOME Transition Project 
Assistive Technology for Kansans 
1-800-526-3648 www.atk.ku.edu Table of Contents 
Accessibility	2 
How to engage Accessibility Features for Vision on your Amazon Show:	2 
How to engage Accessibility features for Hearing and Speech on your Amazon Show:	5 
Calendar	11 
Care Hub	14 
Drop In video calls	18 
Email	23 
Emergencies	25 
Group Calls	27 
Create Your Calling Group(s)	27 
Making a Group Call	28 
Lists	30 
Phone Calls	32 
Making a Phone Call	35 
Answering a Call	35 
Reminders	36 
How to Set an Alarm	37 
How to Set a Timer	39 
Remote Set Up	40 
Set Up	45 
Sharing Photos	50 
Silk Browser - Internet	55 
How to Use the Amazon Silk Browser:	55 
How to Use YouTube in Amazon Silk	56 
How to Use Facebook in Amazon Silk	57 
Texting	58 
Transportation Plan (Keep this Information handy!)	62 

 
Accessibility 
You can enable special accessibility features on your Amazon Show that are designed for those with vision, hearing, or speech impairments. It is important to note that when you turn on an accessibility feature, your device functions differently (such as different gestures for navigation).  If your device isn't responding to your touch or you hear a voice whenever you touch the screen, you may have turned on the VoiceView Screen Reader. Go to VoiceView Screen Reader section below to toggle this feature off.  
Additional information and tutorials about accessibility can be found at Amazon. 
 
Amazon device support includes the article, Using Accessibility Features on Echo Devices with a Screen. 
How to engage Accessibility Features for Vision on your Amazon Show: 
VoiceView Screen Reader with Gestures 
VoiceView is a screen reader included with the Amazon Show device. When enabled, it allows those who are blind or have impaired vision to use gestures to navigate the device while VoiceView reads aloud the actions made on the screen. 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings. Scroll down to Accessibility and Tap Accessibility. 
Select which Accessibility Feature you'd like to engage, such as VoiceView. You can turn VoiceView "On" in two ways:  
1. Say, "Alexa, turn on VoiceView." 
2. Press and hold the Mic/Camera button (the far-left-most button on top of the device). When you hear an alert, place two fingers (slightly apart) on the screen and hold for 5 seconds.  You can customize your VoiceView experience by modifying user settings such as reading speed, speech volume, verbosity, etc. For more information take a look at Amazon's Guide to the VoiceView Screen Reader on Your Echo Device. You can turn VoiceView "Off" in two ways: 
1. Say, "Alexa, Turn off Voice View." 
2. Press and hold the Mic/Camera button (The left-most button on top of the device). When you hear an alert, use a single finger to double tap the screen and hold for 5 seconds.  Screen Magnifier with Gestures 
The Screen Magnifier feature allows people with low vision to zoom  In/out and pan to enlarge items on the screen for improved visibility. 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings.  Scroll down to Accessibility and Tap Accessibility.  Select which Accessibility Features you'd like to engage, such as Screen Magnifier.  Toggle Screen Magnifier "on".  
A video tutorial and additional information about using a Screen 
Magnifier  is available on Amazon.  Triple tap screen to start or stop magnification. Drag 2 fingers to pan. Pinch in and out with 2 fingers to change zoom level. To temporarily magnify screen, triple tap the screen with a finger and hold your finger on the screen. Drag your finger round the screen to pan.   
 	 
Alexa Show and Tell 
Show and Tell helps people who are blind or low vision use the camera on their Amazon Show to identify common packaged food goods that are hard to distinguish by touch.  
Hold your item one foot away from your device's camera.  Say, "Alexa, what am I holding?"  When prompted, turn your item around slowly to show all sides of the packaging. Alexa will help you position the item with tips and sound.  How to engage Accessibility features for Hearing and Speech on your Amazon Show: 
Captioning Features 
• Closed Captioning shows captioning for supported videos and movie trailers. 
• Alexa Captioning shows captioning for supported responses from Alexa in real time. 
• Call Captioning shows captions for calls and video calls in real time. 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings.  Scroll down to Accessibility and tap Accessibility.  Select which Accessibility Features you'd like to engage, Such as Closed Captioning, Alexa Captioning, and/or Call Captioning. Under each option, you can customize things like size, color, and font of text, and background color. Real Time Captioning (RTT) Feature 
• Adds a live, real-time chat feed during Alexa calls and Drop Ins. When RTT is on, a keyboard pops up on the screen, enabling customers to type text which appears in real time on both parties' screens. 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings.  Scroll down to Accessibility and tap Accessibility. Select which Accessibility Features you'd like to engage, Such as Real Time Text.  *Note this feature will be disabled when Call Captioning is enabled. Guard Smart Alerts 
When you set Guard to Away mode, Alexa can:  
• Send you Smart Alerts via notifications to your phone if an Echo device 	 detects the sound of:  o Glass breaking o Smoke alarms o Carbon monoxide alarms 
• Turn connected smart lights on or off to make it look like someone is home. 
• Integrate with some specific security systems. 
 
Say, "Alexa, I'm leaving," or use the Alexa app on your smartphone to start it remotely. Open devices.  On the Guard Dashboard, tap the Home button so that it says Away to start guarding. When you return, Say "Alexa, I'm home," or use the Alexa app to switch back remotely. Open "Devices".  On the Guard Dashboard, tap the Away button so that it says Home to disengage guarding.  Volume and Speaker Detail Features 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings.  Scroll down to Accessibility and tap Accessibility.  Select which Accessibility Features you'd like to adjust, such as Sounds. To 
increase the volume of media, notifications, or alarms. Select Equalizer to adjust more high frequency (treble) sounds or decrease 
bass to fit your hearing loss configuration.  
Alexa's Rate of Speech 
To ask Alexa to speak slower say "Alexa, speak slower." You can also say "Alexa, return to your default rate" to go back to her normal speed. 
Tap to Alexa 
You can use Alexa without your voice by tapping the touchscreen tile or using a keyboard to access helpful features like the weather, news, timers, and other information. 
Say, "Alexa, Go to Settings," or swipe down from the top of the screen and select Settings.  Scroll down to Accessibility and tap Accessibility. Select which Accessibility Features you'd like to engage, such as Tap to Alexa.  Use the Tap to Alexa icon to interact with Alexa using your finger instead of your voice. You can type in a quick question, set a time, check the weather, add or review items on your shopping list.  
 	 

Calendar 
Open the Alexa app.  Open More and select Settings.  Select Calendar & Email.  Choose your account from the list of supported providers.  Select Connect Account.  Confirm if you want to connect your calendar.   
Head into the Calendar & Email section in Settings. Tap the account you want notifications for.  Tap the Calendar Notifications toggle to on.  
 	 
Care Hub 
Care Hub is a free feature in the Alexa app that allows a trusted person to remotely check in on you.  
Using the Amazon Echo Show at your home and the Alexa app on their phone, they'll know you are up and active.   
Alexa will call them if you ask for help. The trusted person can Drop In or call you through Care Hub to see if they need to contact emergency services. 
The trusted person can check the activity feed on your device to see your activity by category (like entertainment). They will get general information that you were using Alexa, but won't see the song you played or what you said. 
The trusted person can set up alerts to notify them if there's no activity or when the first interaction happens every day. It's reassurance for them and independence for you. 
To Get Started 
The Care Hub is a one-to-one relationship between you and a trusted person/family member.  You can only designate one person to participate in your Care Hub. 
The Care Hub Connection requires two separate Amazon accounts to work-one for you and one for your trusted person. 
Amazon has created a Care Hub Set Up Guide.  One of you will need to start the process by sending an invitation to the other person.   
You can send the invitation in the Alexa app on your phone: 

Open the Alexa app.  Select "More."  Select "See More."  Select Care Hub. 
Read through the Care Hub description.  Select "Provide Support" or "Receive Support." Follow instructions to send the invitation to Care Hub.  
The person who receives the invitation must respond and follow the instructions provided. 
Maintaining Privacy 
You can control what activity is displayed in the Care Hub.  You can delete any of your voice recordings in Alexa Privacy Settings or in the Alexa app on your phone at any time. 
You can also say, "Alexa, delete what I just said," or "Alexa, delete everything I said today."  
 
 	 
Drop In video calls 
The Amazon Echo Show can use an intercom-like system called Drop In to call other Echo devices directly, either in your own home or another household. The feature also works with most mobile phones and landlines in the US and certain other countries. 
The difference between Drop In and a regular Echo call is that the person on the other end doesn't need to answer the Drop In.  The call connects automatically as long as the option has been enabled on both devices. People in your Alexa contacts list can also use Drop In to call you. 
If you have difficulty answering calls on your Amazon Echo Show, the Drop In feature can allow people you trust to check in with you. 
To set up Drop In, make sure you have connected your mobile phone to the 
Amazon Echo Show and imported your contact list.  If you haven't already done this, use the instructions on "Making Phone Calls" instruction sheet to add everyone you want to call to your contact list. 
Then: 
Open the Alexa app and tap the icon for Communicate.  Tap the Try Drop-In notice if you see it, otherwise, tap the Contacts icon in the top right corner. Tap the link for My Communication Settings.  Turn on the switch to Allow Drop In.  
Receive Drop In from Specific Contacts 
If you want to be able to receive a Drop in from a specific contact, you need to give that person permission.  
To do this: 
Open the Alexa app and tap the icon for Communicate.  Tap the Contacts icon in the upper right.  Swipe down the list and tap the name of the contact to whom you wish to give Drop In permission. When you receive a Drop in from that contact, you'll hear a chime, the light indicator on your Amazon Echo Show pulses green and you can then start talking. The person who is Dropping In will see  a "frosted glass" view of the camera on your device.  After about 10 seconds, if you do nothing, the blurred out view of the camera will automatically be replaced with a clear view. 
Say "Alexa, hang up" to end the Drop in. To Make a Drop In Call 
Say, "Alexa, Drop In on [name]." 
If the person you are calling has given you drop in privileges ahead of time, you will see a "frosted glass" view of the camera on the device you are dropping in on.  After about 10 seconds, if the receiver does nothing, the blurred out view of the camera will automatically be replaced with a clear view. 
Do Not Disturb 
If you don't want people dropping in on you, Do Not Disturb mode makes sure that can't happen.  Do Not Disturb blocks calls, messages, notifications and reminders to your device.  It does not block your alarms or timers. 
To do this, say "Alexa, turn on Do Not Disturb."    
You can tell if Alexa is in Do Not Disturb mode with the light ring. If you ask Alexa a question and the light ring flashes purple at the end, then Do Not Disturb is enabled. 
To allow calls and other notifications again, say "Alexa, turn off Do Not Disturb."  Alexa will respond, "Do Not Disturb is now off." 
You can also turn Do Not Disturb On and Off using the Alexa app on your phone: 
Open the Alexa app, open Devices.  Select Echo  & Alexa.  Select your device. Select Do Not Disturb.  Toggle Do Not Disturb on or off.  You may schedule your Do Not Disturb times by toggling Scheduled and choosing your start and end times.   
 	 
Email 
Open the Alexa app.  Open More and select Settings.  Select Calendar & Email.  Choose your account from the list of supported providers  
Select Email, and then select Connect Account.  Confirm if you want to connect email and/or calendar. Reading and Replying to Emails with Alexa 
1. Say "Alexa, read my email" or "Alexa, check my email". Alexa will give you a quick glance at how many unread emails you have and tell you if any of them are marked important. 
2. Then, Alexa will start going through your emails, telling you who sent it and what the subject line is. You'll then be given a number of options after it tells you about the email: Read, reply, archive, delete or skip to the next email. 
3. When you choose to reply to an email, Alexa will ask you what you want to say. Say it out loud and confirm that you want to send. 
 	 
Emergencies 
Alexa CANNOT dial 911. 
Alexa CAN call a trusted contact when you need help. 
To set up the Alexa Emergency Contact service, you need to designate one of the contacts in your cell phone as your emergency contact in the Alexa app.  After you do this, you'll be all set with the Amazon Echo Show device you have connected to the app. Make sure the contact number you choose is a cell number and not a landline or the Emergency Contact feature won't work. 
To set up an Emergency Contact: 
Open the Alexa app.  Select Communicate.  Select the Contact icon in the upper right corner.  Tap the Menu icon in the upper-right corner of the screen. Select Emergency Contact from the list of options, then follow the on-screen instructions to finish the setup.  The person you selected will get a text message letting them know that you have made them your emergency contact. So, it may be a good idea to let your friend or family member know before you set up the feature, just so they aren't surprised by the text. 
If your Emergency Contact ever changes their number, you'll need to update the number in your Alexa app. 
If you ever need to make someone else your emergency contact, it only takes a few minutes to make that change, too. Use the same steps listed above. Your emergency contact will be listed on the screen. Tap on Manage and then Remove As Emergency Contact. Once that's done, tap Select Contact to add a new emergency contact. 
How to use Alexa to call for help: 
Say, "Alexa, call for help" or "Alexa, call my emergency contact." 	 
Group Calls 
You can use your Amazon Echo Show to make a group call.   
Enhanced features must be enabled to make or accept a group call. 
Create Your Calling Group(s) 
Before making a group call, you will need to create a group. 
To do this: 
 
Open the Alexa app.  Open Communicate.  Select the Contacts icon in the upper right corner.  Select Add New.  Select Add Group.  Add group members and select Continue.  Name the group and select Create Group. The name you give your calling group is also used to make group calls with your voice.  For example, "Alexa, call Family" or "Alexa, call Rotary Friends." 
Making a Group Call 
You can make a group call using your voice or using the menu on your Amazon Echo Show. 
Use your voice to say: 
	• 	"Call [group name]." 
On your Amazon Echo Show: 
 
Swipe from the left of the screen on your Echo Show device. 
Open Communicate.  Select Call.  Select the name of the group you want to call.   
 	 
Lists 
Open the Alexa app.  Open More.  Select Lists and Notes.  Select Create List, then enter the name of your list such as "shopping" or "todo."   
 
  Select Add Item and type in the desired item.  A unique feature is that you can invite others to add to your list by selecting "share" while you are in your list (and within the Alexa app.)  This allows you to send a text or email message inviting another person to see your list. If you are using the pre-created "shopping list," it takes that person directly to the Amazon website to shop or add to your list.  You can also use your voice to create or add to your list by saying "Alexa, create a list" or "Alexa, add (item) to my (list name) list." If you swipe left on an item, it offers options to delete the item or look it up on Amazon.   
 	 
Phone Calls 
You can use your Amazon Show to make calls to mobile and landline numbers in the U.S., U.K., Canada, and Mexico with no additional cost. 
Note: Alexa Calling does not support calls to the following types of numbers: 
• Emergency service numbers (for example "911") 
• Premium-rate numbers (for example "1-900" numbers, or toll numbers) 
• Three-digit numbers / abbreviated dial codes (for example "211") 
• International numbers (outside the U.S., U.K., Canada, and Mexico) 
• Dial-by-letter numbers (for example "1-800-FLOWERS") You will use Alexa Communication to add contact information for the people you want to be able to call. There are two ways to do this: 
A) Connect Amazon Show to your cell phone and import your contacts 
B) Manually enter contact information into your Alexa app 
How to connect your phone to your Amazon Show: 
Import the contact list from your cell phone to call anyone you've saved to your contacts, and to call other Amazon Echo and Echo Show devices. 
 
Download the Alexa app on your phone.  Open the Alexa app and tap "More" on the menu bar. Tap Settings.  Tap your profile and add your mobile number.  Import your mobile phone's contact list when prompted. How to manually add contact information to your Alexa app: 
If you want to communicate with someone using your Amazon Show and you haven't added them to your mobile phone's address book, you can manually add their contact information via the Alexa app. 

Download the Alexa app on your mobile phone.  Tap "Communicate" on the bottom menu.  Tap the person icon at the top right.  Tap the 3 dots on the top right, to the right of the word "Contacts."   Tap "Add contact."  Enter a name and phone number, then select "Save" Making a Phone Call 
You can use your voice to make calls. 
Say: 
• "Call [Name's] Echo." 
• "Call [Name's] mobile." 
• "Call [Name] on his home phone." 
• "Call [Name] at work." 
• "Call [Name's] office." 
• "Call [Mom/Dad/Grandma]." 
• If someone isn't in your contacts, you can call by saying "Call [number]." 
• If you misplaced your phone, you can call it by saying, "Call my phone." 
Answering a Call 
If you receive a voice or video call on the Amazon Show, you can see the contact name of the caller. You can then either answer the call by saying "Alexa, answer" or reject the call by saying "Alexa, ignore." 
 
 	 
Reminders 
To set a Reminder, open the Alexa app.  Open More.  Select Reminders.  Select Add Reminder, then enter the details you want, including the Alexa device you want to announce the reminder and whether the reminder repeats.  
 
  You can also use your voice to set a reminder on your Amazon Echo Show By saying "Alexa, remind me to take out the trash every Thursday at 8:00 in the morning."    * It is important to note that reminders are only announced twice. If you're in another room when Alexa announces your reminder, you might miss it. If you need a reminder to do something important that you can't miss, you may want to set an alarm instead. 
How to Set an Alarm 
To set an Alarm, open your Alexa app.   Open More and select Settings. 
  Select Alarms.  Select Add Alarm.  Enter the Amazon device you want to announce the reminder, the time/date of the alarm, and repetition. 
You can customize the alarm sound with one of the available tones or phrases. 
You can also use your voice to set an Alarm on your Amazon Echo Show by saying "Alexa, set an alarm for (time of day)" or "Alexa, set a repeating alarm for (day of the week) at (time)."  You can snooze a reminder or alarm for fifteen minutes by saying "Alexa, snooze". You can stop an alarm or reminder by saying "Alexa, stop."  Note: There is no way to name the Alarm so if you need to remember the task, set a reminder instead. 
 
How to Set a Timer 
To set a Timer, use your voice to set a timer on your Echo device by saying "Alexa, set a timer for (minutes)." You can name timers such as "Alexa, set a homework timer for (duration) minutes." Access active timers by toggling from Alarms to Timers in app.  Active timers are visible from Alexa app. 
To change Timer sounds, devices on which Timers are played, and notification settings, tap "Settings" at the bottom of the screen.  If the timer rings multiple times and isn't manually stopped, you can announce the Timer to a caregiver's Amazon device or phone.   
Remote Set Up 
If the person who will be using the Echo Show might have difficulty setting it up, family members or caregivers can help with the setup remotely. These instructions are to be used you are setting up an Echo Show for a person who lives in a different location. If the person is able to go through the set-up steps independently or someone is helping set up an Echo Show in the household where the person lives, use Amazon Echo Show: Set Up instructions. 
Note: If you're gifting an Echo Show and want to do remote setup, send the device to yourself first and choose the gift option at shipping to prevent your account from syncing with the device. 
Before sending the Echo Show to the person, you can save their Wi-Fi network to it to help with setup. The person who will be using the Echo Show will need an email address with a known password and an Amazon account with a password. If they do not have an existing Amazon account, create one before beginning set up. It is not necessary to have an Amazon Prime account to use the Echo devices.   
Note: It is not advisable to share an Amazon account with a user who lives in another setting as notifications and changes made on one device will appear on all devices on that account.  
My email address:  My email password:  My Amazon account:    My Amazon password:  My Wi-Fi network is called:  My Wi-Fi network password:  My Alexa helper:   	 
Set Up Your Echo Show 
To get started, plug the included power adapter into a power outlet, then into your device. The Echo Show will automatically turn on. There is no power button. 
There are three external buttons located at the top of the Echo Show: Mute, Volume Up, Volume Down. 
Modified instructions from information available at Amazon.  
Follow the on-screen prompts to: 
1. Tap the screen and select a language. 
 
2. Select your Wi-Fi network name from the list of available networks. 
 
3. Enter the Wi-Fi password, then tap done in the bottom right corner. 
	 	 
4. Type in the person's Amazon account email and password and tap Sign in at the bottom. 
 
5. Confirm the time zone and tap Continue to complete setup. 
 
After setup is complete, use the following steps to save the person's Wi-Fi network: 
1. Swipe down from the top of the Echo Show screen and select Settings. 

3. Scroll down and select Add a Network under Preferences. 
 	 
7. Select Save. 

8. You can now unplug Echo Show, re-package it and send it to your loved one. Echo Show will connect to your loved one's Wi-Fi network after they receive it and plug it in. They will need to enter their Amazon account password on the screen for security purposes. 
 
9. Help the recipient decide the best location to set up your Amazon Show. Choose a place close to an outlet where the cord won't be a tripping hazard or come into contact with water. Put it in a place away from areas where you need privacy, and where the camera has good lighting for the clearest picture. 
 
 	 
Set Up 
These instructions are to be used if the person is able to go through the set up steps independently or someone is helping set up an Echo Show in the household where the person lives.  If you are setting up an Echo Show for someone who lives in a different location, use the Amazon Show: Remote Set Up. 
The person will need an email address with a known password and an Amazon account with a password.  If they do not have an existing Amazon account, create one before beginning set up.  It is not necessary to have an Amazon Prime account to use the Echo devices.   
Note:  It is not advisable to share an Amazon account with a user who lives in another setting as notifications and changes made on one device will appear on all devices on that account.  
My email address:  My email password:  My Amazon account:    My Amazon password:  My Wi-Fi network is called:  My Wi-Fi network password:  My Alexa helper:  Set Up Your Echo Show 
To get started, plug the included power adapter into a power outlet, then into your device. The Echo Show will automatically turn on. There is no power button. 
 
There are three external buttons located at the top of the Echo Show:  
• Mute 
• Volume Up 
• Volume Down 
 
Modified from information provided at Amazon.  
Follow the on-screen prompts to: 
 
1. Tap the screen and select a language. 
 
2. Select your Wi-Fi network name from the list of available networks. 
 
3. Enter the Wi-Fi password, then tap done in the bottom right corner. 
 
4. Log into your Amazon account and tap Sign In at the bottom. 
  
 	 
 	 
9. Choose a wallpaper background for your device. 
 
10. Follow the on-screen steps to review your available offers. 
 
11. Watch the introduction video. 
 
12. When you see the home screen with rotating pages, your device is ready to use. 
 
 
13. Decide the best location to set up your Amazon Show. Choose a place close to an outlet where the cord won't be a tripping hazard or come into contact with water. Put it in a place away from areas where you need privacy, and where the camera has good lighting for the clearest picture. 

Sharing Photos 
You can share photos with friends and family on your Amazon Echo Show using the Alexa app.   
You will need to store the photos that you want to share in Amazon Photos.  Amazon Photos is a secure online storage service for your photos.  Amazon customers without a Prime account get 5G of free storage space.  Amazon Prime customers get free unlimited photo storage.   
Friends and family can upload photos into Amazon Photos using a web browser: 
 
Open Amazon Photos 
https://www.amazon.com/photos 
  Select the Add icon on the top menu bar, which looks like a yellow +. 
Choose Upload photos or Create album, then select the photos you want to share.   	 
To share photos with other people on your contact list: 
 
Open the Alexa app and select Communicate.  Select Share.  Select a photo.  The photo can't exceed 120 MB. Select a contact, then select Share.   	 

To view photos: 
Say, "Alexa, show my photos." 
Deleting shared photos:  
When you delete a photo, the person can no longer view the photo on their Amazon Echo Show or Amazon Photos app.  
Note: Deleting photos from the Amazon Photos app will not delete the shared photo entirely if the recipient has downloaded a copy to their device, or shared it with someone else. 
Photos can be deleted using a web browser: 
Open Amazon Photos 
https://www.amazon.com/photos  Choose photos you want to delete.  Select Move to Trash, click on Delete. 
  Deleted items from Amazon Photos are added to your Trash folder. 

Silk Browser - Internet 
To use the internet on your Amazon Echo Show, you can use the internet browser called Amazon Silk.  
Using the browser, you can: 
• Search for information 
• Use social media 
• Watch videos 
• Bookmark frequently used websites 
Note: The Echo Show also has Firefox, if that is your preference. The Silk browser tends to format web pages best on the Echo Show. To choose a default browser, go to Settings > Device Options > Web Options > Browser. 
How to Use the Amazon Silk Browser: 
Say "Alexa, open Silk." The browser window will appear.  You can type the URL address into the top bar. You can also type search words into the URL bar, and Silk will search for webpages with that information.  You can also say "Alexa, go to [website name]." Silk will pull up that website directly. How to Use YouTube in Amazon Silk 
From the home screen, you can just say, "Alexa, open YouTube." It will pull up the YouTube home page.  If you have a YouTube or Google account, log in by tapping the "Sign In" link and type your username and password.  Search for videos in the top search bar and tap the arrow. If you have the address of the video you want, type it into the URL bar.  
 	 
How to Use Facebook in Amazon Silk 
Say "Alexa, open Facebook." It will pull up the Facebook home page. Type in your email address or phone number and your password to log in to your account. You can now access your Facebook news feed. Note: Facebook Messenger is not yet available for the Amazon Echo Show. 
How to Make a Bookmark 
Once you see your homepage, you can set a bookmark by tapping the bookmark icon to the right of the URL box.  The bookmark icon will be filled in if a bookmark has been set for the page. 
Otherwise, it will be light.  You will now see the bookmarked page when you tap the bookmarks icon in the top left corner.  
 	 
Texting 
You can use your Amazon Show and Alexa app to send and receive text messages to other people's Alexa devices or Alexa app. 
You'll need an iPhone with iOS 9.0 or higher or an Android phone with Android 5.0 or higher. 
How to send a text with an Alexa device: 
Say "Alexa, send a message." Alexa will ask for the name of the recipient. Choose a name from your contact list in the Alexa app. You can also do this by going to the Communicate menu by swiping left on the home screen, then tap Message.  Alexa then asks for the text of the message. Dictate your message.  Confirm that the message is correct, and then Alexa will send it.  
 	 
How to send a text message from the Alexa app: 
Download the Alexa app on your mobile phone.  Tap on the "Communicate" icon.  Tap on New Message, which will show you all the contacts that Alexa is able to message. Tap on the name of the contact you wish to message.  Hold down the microphone icon and dictate your message, or tap on the keyboard icon and type your message. You can preview the message, tap the X to delete it, or the arrow to send it. How to see a received message on Alexa: 
If you receive a message from another Alexa contact, the notification appears on your Echo device.  To hear the message, say: "Alexa, play message." Alexa tells you who the message is for and asks if you want to hear it. Say: "Yes," and Alexa plays the message.  Your phone also displays a notification that you've received a message through the Alexa app. Tap on the message or open the Alexa app to view it. You can then tap on the Play button to hear it read aloud.  You can even respond to an existing message in the Alexa app or with the 
Echo Show device. Go to 
Communication, tap Messages, and with the message displayed on the screen, dictate your response.  
 	 
Transportation Plan (Keep this Information handy!) 
You and your helper decide what works best for you. Where do you go most often? 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Choose a reliable transportation option. Will you use a rideshare app service, or call public transportation for rides?          
 
My technology helper:  My device:  Important to know before scheduling the ride:  Important things to bring with me when I go out:  Emergency contact:  If you schedule rides with an app: 
My service provider:  What I say to open that app:  My log in username:  My log in password:    How I use my device to get a ride:  If you schedule rides with a phone call: 
My service provider:  Transportation phone #:  Hours open:  How I use my device to get a ride:  Finally, use your device to test out what it's like to schedule transportation to a common destination. 
Assistive Technology for Kansans (ATK). 9-13-2021 2 
 

Assistive Technology for Kansans (ATK). 9-13-2021 2 
 

www.atk.ku.edu / 800-526-3648 / Going Home TRANSITION 

www.atk.ku.edu / 800-526-3648 / Going Home TRANSITION 

	Assistive Technology for Kansans (ATK). 	 
 

www.atk.ku.edu / 800-526-3648 / Going Home TRANSITION 

