Social Media Accessibility Best Practices


Best Practices for Social Media Accessibility

Use Plain Language

●       Plain Language is writing that is clear, concise, well-organized, and follows other best practices appropriate to the subject or field and intended audience.

●       Always use plain language in your social media postings and avoid using acronyms, abbreviations, and jargon.

[]

Use CamelCase Hashtags

•      CamelCase is the practice of capitalizing the first letters of words in multiple word hashtags.

•      CamelCase allows screen reader technology to distinguish words in a hashtag, increases legibility, and makes the hashtag overall easier to read for everyone.  

[]

Add Alternative Text to Images

●       The purpose of Alternative (Alt) text is to allow low vision or blind users to understand the purpose of the image. 

●       When adding Alt text: 

○ Describe only how the image relates to the content. What is its purpose? Why is the image there? 

○ Make sure the Alt text is brief. Try keeping it under two sentences or 8 to 120 characters or less.

○ Do not use words or phrases such as “Image of…”, “photo of…” in the alt text.

Adding Alternative Text: Twitter

1. Enable custom image descriptions feature

a.        Select the “More” button on the left side panel in your twitter profile.

 [] 

b.        Select “Settings and Privacy”.  

c.         Go to General Settings and select “Accessibility”. 

d.        Find “Compose image descriptions” and select the checkbox. This will enable custom image descriptions. 

2.    Add image descriptions (Web Version)

a.      Compose a twitter posting and add an image.

b.      When the image is uploaded, below the image, select the link called “Add Description”. 

c.       A pop-up will appear to add the image description. Add your custom description and select “Done”.  

[]

[]

3.    Add image descriptions (Mobile Version)

a.      Compose a twitter posting and upload an image. 

b.      When the image is uploaded, select the button at the bottom of the screen that says “+Alt”

c.       Add your alt text in the space that says, “Describe this photo…” and then select “Done”. 

[] 

 

[]

Adding Alternative Text: Facebook

•      Facebook will automatically populate alt text to all images, but it is not descriptive alt text. 

•      To change automatic alt text in the web version: 

1.        Compose a Facebook posting and add an image. 

2.        Select the photo that you’d like to describe in Alt Text. 

3.        Select the three dots in the top right corner of your post.

4.        When the menu opens, select the Change Alt Text.

•      To change automatic alt text in the mobile version: 

1.        Compose a Facebook posting and add an image. With the mobile version, you will need to publish your posting first. 

2.        Once your image is posted, select the image and look for 3 dots on the top right corner. Select the dots to open “Edit Alt Text”. 

3.        Select “Override generated alt text”. 

4.        This will open a text field to add custom alt text. Input the new alt text and select the “Save” button. 

[]

33_(TU)Credit to Explore Access: Accessible Images and PostsU33_(T)

 

[]

Adding Alternative Text: Instagram

1.      Begin uploading a photo to Instagram.

2.      Customize the image as desired and select “Next” until you reach the New Post window. 

3.      At the bottom of New Post, select “Advanced Settings”.

4.      Go to Accessibility and select “Write Alt Text”.

5.      A window will appear with at text field. Write your desired alt text and select “Save/Done”. 

[]

[]

Adding Alternative Text: LinkedIn

1.      Start a new post and upload an image.

2.      Select “Add Alt Text” at the bottom of the window.

3.      Add your alt text in the popup that appears and select “Save”. 

* NOTE: In LinkedIn you are limited to 120 characters for your Alt text. 

[]

[]

Universal Alternative for Alt Text

•      In-line image descriptions are descriptions that are within a user’s social media posting. 

•      These image descriptions are visible to all users and are therefore accessible to everyone.  

•      The image description is preceded with a word or phrase below the posting, such as “[Photo description: text description]”, “Accessibility text: text description”, etc. 

[]

For Captions and Audio Files

●       All videos and audio files posted in social media, must have captions. 

●       YouTube and Facebook have an auto captioning feature; however, this feature has a lot of errors. 

●       YouTube also allows users to generate their own caption. Visit 33_(T)Do It Yourself (DIY) captions33_(T) to learn more. 

●       Twitter has a Twitter Media Studio feature that allows users to upload closed captions on videos in Twitter.

●       Instagram TV just releases new auto-generated captions for IGTV in 16 languages. Visit 33_(T)New IGTV Captions33_(T).

Link Shorteners

●       Link shorteners convert long URL’s into small, easier to manage URL’s.  

●       They make it easier for all users to type a URL and they also benefit screen reader users as they help limit the raw characters a screen reader must read aloud.

●       Some useful shortening websites: 33_(T)Bit.ly33_(T) , 33_(T)Tiny.cc33_(T) , 33_(T)Tinyurl.com33_(T), 33_(T)Ow.ly33_(T)

[]
