
Overview
Cover_sheet
Checklist_for_the_spreadsheet
Checklist_for_a_worksheet

Sheet 1: Cover_sheet
Spreadsheet accessibility checklist template These checklists are based on the 'Releasing statistics in spreadsheets' guidance published on the Government Statistical Service (GSS) website. Two checklists are presented on each checklist tab. One is a list of things that must be done to pass the accessibility legislation, one is a list of things that are good to do for accessibility. These checklists should be used after reading the guidance and watching the demonstration on how to implement the guidance.Useful links Main spreadsheet guidance: Releasing statistics in spreadsheetsA demonstration on implementing the spreadsheet guidanceMaking spreadsheets accessible: a checklist of the basicsMaking analytical publications accessible Using symbols and shorthand in tablesAccessibility legislation: what you need to know 
Sheet 2: Checklist_for_the_spreadsheet
Checklist for the spreadsheetThis worksheet contains two tables presented underneath each other with one blank row in between. This checklist is for the spreadsheet as a whole.Name of spreadsheet: Must doYes or No Useful linksHave you removed all blank worksheets? Do all your worksheets have unique names or numbers in the tabs along the bottom?If any of your worksheets have subheadings have you tagged them correctly? Remember, second level subheadings should be a Headings 2, third level a Headings 3 and so on.Have you added document information? Saving and publishing spreadsheets section of the main guidance. Have you run a spelling and grammar check? It is in the Review ribbon.Good to doYes or No Have you used Excel's accessibility checker? Remember it isn't perfect but it will flag up some things you may have missed.Did you ensure the cursor was in cell A1 of the first worksheet when you did your final save? 
Sheet 3: Checklist_for_a_worksheet
Checklist template for a worksheetThis worksheet contains two tables presented underneath each other with one blank row in between. Each worksheet in your spreadsheet needs a checklist assigned to it Name of worksheet: Must doYes or NoUseful links Is the worksheet heading in cell A1? Have you tagged the worksheet heading as a 'Headings 1' using the cell styles tool on the Home ribbon? Are all tables on the worksheet marked-up using the insert table tool? This can be found on the Insert ribbon. Do all the tables have one marked-up header row? Have all merged cells, split cells and nested tables been removed? Have all blank rows and columns within tables been removed? Is all text visible and spaced out? If you have used filters or freeze panes have you made it clear they are switched on and explained how to switch them off using a mouse and keyboard shortcuts? More information on freeze panes and filters is in the Tables section of the main guidance.Have you checked all blank cells meet the criteria and is the appropriate guidance provided?Cells with no data section of the main guidance. Have you replaced all symbols with the appropriate shorthand as outlined in our 'Using symbols and shorthand' guidance? 
% and £ are OK. Symbols, footnotes and codes section of the main guidance. Do all hyperlinks have descriptive link text?Formatting and use of colour section of the main guidance. Is the hyperlink text the default blue colour? It is OK to leave hyperlink text the default blue colour. Hyperlink text should also be underlined (even though underline is discouraged in all other situations). Have you ensured colour has not been used as the only way to communicate a message? When you have used colour for emphasis have you ensured the contrast between the text and the background meets the required standard? Formatting and use of colour section of the main guidance. Have you removed any headers, footers, floating text boxes or floating toolbars? Have you avoided the use of images? If you have images have you ensured they have alternative text? Are all tables positioned against the left-hand edge of each sheet? Remember, you should not use blank columns to create space.If your worksheet has multiple tables have you made sure to read and follow this section of the main spreadsheet guidance? Worksheets with multiple tables section of the main guidance. Good to do Yes or NoIs the worksheet heading descriptive - can non-experts understand what is on this worksheet? Have you edited the default formatting of the heading and any subheadings? Ideally you should select the 'automatic' font colour and take off the cell border.Does cell A2 have a description of what is on this worksheet? For example "This worksheet contains one table, some cells refer to notes which can be found on the notes worksheet"Is the table marked up with a meaningful name? This can be done by clicking into a marked-up table and then onto the Design ribbon. Have you set the background fill to 'No fill'? Note - if you don't like the gridlines that appear when you remove the fill, these can be switched off in the View ribbon.If a table refers to notes, have you clearly explained where notes can be found in a cell in column A, above the table? Is all text a sans serif font (e.g. Arial or Calibri) Have you removed any italic text? Have you limited your use of cell borders? Have you removed any macros? 
