CREATING ACCESSIBLE MICROSOFT WORD 2016 

DOCUMENTS (WINDOWS) 
Heading Styles 
Create a uniform heading structure through use of styles in Word. Tis allows screen readers to navigate a document and improves accessiblity for everyone. 
1. Start a new line to create a heading, or select text to change to a heading. 
2. Open the Home tab, and choose the appropriate heading in the Styles panel. Headings 1, 2, or 3 can also be assigned using Ctrl + 
Images can be given appropriate alternative text in 
Word. Alt text is read by a screen reader in a Word fle and should remain intact when exporting to HTML or PDF. 
Always use true columns. Don't create columns with Tab. 
1. Select the Layout tab on the ribbon. 
2. Select Columns in the Page Setup group. 
3. Choose the number of columns. 
Lists 
Use true numbered and bulleted lists to emphasize a point or a sequence of steps. 1. 	Select the Home tab on the ribbon. 
2. 	Choose the Numbered List or Bulleted List option from the Paragraph group. 
Word automatically creates a hyperlink when a user pastes a full URL onto a page. Tese may not make sense to screen reader users, so make sure the link text is unique. 
1. Select a hyperlink, right click, and select Hyperlink or hit Ctrl + k. 
2. Change the text in the Text to Display feld to a more meaningful description. 

Data Tables 
Accessible tables need a clear table structure and table headers to help guide a screen reader user. 
1. Select the Insert tab on the ribbon, then select Table > Insert Table. 
2. To add table headers to the frst row, select 
Table Tools > Layout on the ribbon, then choose the Repeat Header Rows option in the Data section. 

Options in the Design tab may be used to change appearance but will not provide the necessary accessibility information. 
Accessibility Checker 
Word includes an accessibility resource that identifes accessibility issues. 
1. Select File > Info > Check for Issues > Check Accessibility. 
2. Te checker presents accessibility errors, warnings, and tips for making repairs. 
Select specifc issues to see Additional Information at the bottom of the task pane. 
Other Principles 
• Ensure that font size is sufcient, around 12 points. 
• Provide sufcient contrast. 
• Don't use color as the only way to convey meaning. 
• Provide a table of contents for long documents. 
• Use simple language. 

(c) Project GOALS | WebAIM. All rights reserved.  	For a digital version, see ncdae.org/resources/cheatsheets 
