Digital Accessibility procurement scoring guidanceThis document has been created to support the consistent digital accessibility procurement requirements and help both reviewers and suppliers understand what evidence constitutes a given score, and what action may be needed to reach a higher score.
Normally, SaaS procurement fits into one of three categories, a bespoke build for the customer, a standard product with customisable components, or a commercial off the shelf product (COTS). Each scoring point begins with an indication of which of these categories they refer to, or are marked as 'Any' for universally applicability.Broader guidance on understanding supplier responses and digital accessibility in procurement can be found on MakeThingsAccessible.comLast Updated 10/05/2024V1.2RequirementNameDescription0123TECHREQ-DA1DA - ComplianceDescribe how the supplier will ensure the proposed solution (customer and staff facing) shall meet and maintain compliance with the latest published version of WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines) (currently 2.2) A and AA success criteria, in line with regulation requirements and international best practice. Supplier to provide test reports to evidence how they meet / don't meet WCAG compliance including listing test tooling used, their audit process or the audit process of the subcontractor they may involve for external testing. For example, a detailed WCAG audit report, VPAT, evidence of assistive technology testing or user testing with disabled user groups. Supplier to also provide their development roadmap for accessibility if their product partially complies, and how they plan to test and maintain compliance in future.(Customised or COTS) Supplier has provided no evidence to demonstrate levels of WCAG compliance.

(Bespoke) Supplier has provided no evidence on how they plan to test a new build product.

(Any) Supplier has confirmed there are seriously impacting accessibility issues that will not be resolved.

(Any) Supplier provides one of the negative responses listed in the MTA Reviewing procurement responses guidance.

(Any) Supplier indicates use of a 3rd party accessibility auditing specialist but provides no WCAG compliance testing results or information on testing tools used.(Customised or COTS) Supplier provides a VPAT with only generic information such as "Some parts of the website are not keyboard accessible" rather than any specific areas.

(Customised or COTS) Supplier provides WCAG audit report that is more than 12 months old and no roadmap or evidence that any further action was taken following the audit report.

(Customised or COTS) Supplier provides some information on testing tools but is a limited testing selection focussed on automated testing.

(Bespoke) Supplier plans to test against WCAG but lists limited tooling and focusses on automated testing without any planned manual audit or assistive technology testing.(Customised or COTS) Supplier provides WCAG audit report less than 12 months old but lacks evidence on how any issues identified are being prioritised and remediated.

(Bespoke) Supplier provides information on planned testing to produce a WCAG audit report including a mix of automated tooling as well as manual and assistive technology testing, but lacks evidence on how any issues identified will be prioritised and remediated after testing.

(Any) Supplier plans to engage (named) reputable accessibility auditing specialist but is not clear on how they will feed results back into a remediation process and roadmap.

(Any) Supplier provides information on testing tools which includes a mix of automated tools as well as manual and assistive technology testing.(Customised or COTS) Supplier provides WCAG audit report (any date) and evidence of fixes already applied and/or a defined roadmap for future fixes with dates.

(Bespoke) Supplier provides clear information on comprehensive planned testing to produce a WCAG audit report, how accessibility testing is built into the development roadmap, and how issues will be prioritised and remediated after testing.

(Any) Supplier plans to engage (named) reputable accessibility auditing specialist and demonstrates clearly where this action fits into their development lifecycle, remediation process and roadmap.

(Any) Supplier provides information on testing tools which includes a mix of automated tools as well as manual and assistive technology testing. May also include plans for UAT with different assistive technology users.TECHREQ-DA2DA - CustomisationDescribe levels of customisations available to the customer in terms of themes, GUI, and functionality. Supplier should explain what impacts customisations may have on accessibility compliance and how the supplier supports customers to check for and mitigating accessibility risks being introduced during the implementation process. For example, does the supplier maintain guidance on how to implement GUI or theme changes to maintain colour or magnification requirements, or components list and their known accessibility issues so that customers can choose only accessible components before implementation.(Customised) Supplier has provided no evidence to demonstrate accessibility compliance for individual component options.

(Customised) Supplier has provided no advice on where client-customisation options may introduce accessibility issues.

(Customised) Supplier has confirmed that all or a large number of components the client would require have accessibility issues that will not be resolved.(Customised) Supplier has provided evidence to show which components are accessible by default and which ones are not. Further checking is necessary to confirm if the list of accessible components can meet client needs.

(Customised) Supplier has provided some advice on where client customisation options may introduce accessibility issues but has no significant guidance on how to avoid accessibility issues during the implementation and customisation process.(Customised) Supplier has a comprehensive list of components and evidence that the components are accessible by default.

(Customised) Supplier has provided advice on where client customisation options may introduce accessibility issues and with what components, and has clear guidance for the implementation and customisation process to avoid these identified possible accessibility issues.N/ATECHREQ-DA3DA - Content CreationDescribe how the solution supports accessible web content creation and upload compliance with WCAG where relevant. For example, what restrictions, options, or guidance the solution includes to help content creators upload or write accessible web content, such as internal checks for appropriate heading structure or the presence of alternative text on uploaded images.(Any) Where the product allows staff to publish content, the supplier has provided no evidence of accessibility features.

(Any) Where the product allows staff to publish content, the supplier has confirmed that there are active blockers to publishing accessible content.(Any) Where the product allows staff to publish content, the supplier has confirmed there are no blockers, but likewise no additional functionality to encourage the publishing of accessible content.(Any) Where the product allows staff to publish content, The supplier has confirmed basic functionality to enable things like correct heading structure requirements, mandatory alternative text descriptions / marking images as decorative etc.(Any) Where the product allows staff to publish content, the supplier has confirmed basic functionality (as described in score 2) as well as additional functionality or admin options to encourage accessible publishing. This might include additional software such as in-built accessibility checkers for content creators, or 3rd party products that offer the same functionality.TECHREQ-DA4DA - Staff ToolsDescribe how the solution supports disabled staff in using authoring tools to create content in compliance with the ATAG (Authoring Tools Accessibility Guidelines 2.0). For example, how do internal screens function with keyboard controls and assistive technologies like screen readers or dictation software to ensure staff can navigate and interact with internal functions.(Any) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, for example a wordpress admin view, the supplier has provided no evidence to demonstrate the interface is accessible, or the levels of compliance with ATAG or WCAG.

(Any) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, for example a wordpress admin view, the supplier has confirmed that there are seriously impacting accessibility issues that will not be resolved.

NOTE: (Bespoke) Where the product is planned to have a separate "back end" or "staff" interface that is not an existing 3rd party component (will be built as part of development), this requirement refers back to DA-Compliance (REQ1) as part of planned testing and compliance for the system. Mark this requirement in accordance with REQ1 scoring.(Customised or COTS) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, the supplier can point to limited internal testing of the interface for compliance with ATAG or WCAG (See DA-Compliance (REQ1) for compliance evidence quality advice).

(Any) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, for example a wordpress admin view which is a 3rd party product, the supplier can point to limited 3rd party evidence for compliance with ATAG or WCAG. This may be a VPAT with only generic information (See DA-Compliance (REQ1) for compliance evidence quality advice).(Customised or COTS) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, the supplier can point to comprehensive internal testing of the interface for compliance with ATAG or WCAG (See DA-Compliance (REQ1) for compliance evidence quality advice).

(Any) Where the product has a separate "back end" or "staff" interface, for example a wordpress admin view which is a 3rd party product, the supplier can point to detailed 3rd party evidence for compliance with ATAG or WCAG. This may be a WCAG audit report with individual issue level information (See DA-Compliance (REQ1) for compliance evidence quality advice).N/ATECHREQ-DA5DA - OverlaysThe supplier will indicate if in the delivery of the solution they are using or plan to use any products provided by companies listed in the Overlay Fact Sheet, or any other products that fit the description below. Overlay and Underlay products/plugins/add-ons which offer to remediate accessibility issues represent a false approach to accessibility compliance and can present legal and reputational risks to both the supplier and customer. It is important to be clear on where and what the supplier is using overlay products for because overlay products cannot be used for regulation compliance.(Customised or COTS) Supplier has suggested the use of an Overlay product already incorporated into the solution as the sole action towards accessibility.

(Bespoke) Supplier has suggested the use of an Overlay product in delivery instead of any other testing or use of accessible design practices.(Any) Supplier has suggested the use of an overlay product as an option, but it can be removed or disabled for delivery to the client.(Any) Supplier has confirmed that they do not use or intend to use any overlay products and are committed to delivering an accessible website by default.N/ATECHREQ-DA6DA - StatementSupplier to provide a copy of the accessibility statement for their product covering core technical sections as required by the Public Sector Bodies Accessibility Regulations (2018). Or the supplier agrees to works with the customer to produce an accessibility statement for the proposed solution which meets customer legislative obligation as a public sector body under PSBAR (2018) and is acceptable to the customer. The prerequisite (REQ1) being that the supplier has sufficient evidence of WCAG compliance testing from which to draw details required for the accessibility statement.(Any) Supplier has suggested that it is not their responsibility to provide an accessibility statement as they are not in scope of PSBAR. Therefore not reading the requirement that they are to help us deliver the required statement by providing us pertinent information on WCAG compliance of the platform (REQ1).(Any) Supplier has confirmed that they are happy to work with the client to produce the required information for a regulation accessibility statement, but does not currently have an existing statement ready.(Any) Supplier has provided a PSBAR aligned accessibility statement, or content in the correct format to be inserted into a PSBAR compliant statement template.N/ATECHREQ-DA7DA - AT GuidanceThe supplier provides / works with the customer to provide guidance for assistive technology users. Guidance material required in all cases; additional guidance required to navigate areas of non-compliance with WCAG if present.(Customised or COTS) Supplier does not have any guidance material on the interaction between the platform and assistive technologies, and does not plan to create any.

(Bespoke) Supplier confirms they do not plan to create any guidance on the interaction between the platform and assistive technologies as part of delivery.(Any) Supplier does not have any guidance material on the interaction between the platform and assistive technologies, but commits to creating required materials as part of delivery.(Customised or COTS) Supplier has some guidance on the interaction between the platform and assistive technologies which can be included into client knowledge bases. This information is more succinct and focuses on issues and alternate routes.

(Bespoke) Supplier does not have guidance for an unbuilt platform, but has a basic plan for what assistive technologies they will review with and how they will construct guidance.(Customised or COTS) Supplier can demonstrate previous comprehensive action on creating guidance material on the interaction between the platform and assistive technologies which may include review by different assistive technology users. Guidance material is not only focussed on avoiding issues, but also on shortcuts, easier navigation and other productivity boosting advice for assistive technology users.

(Bespoke) Supplier does not have guidance for an unbuilt platform but has a comprehensive plan for assistive technology testing which may include review by different assistive technology users.TECHREQ-DA8DA - Documents and Other FormatsDescribe how the supplier will ensure that any related non-web content generated by the system shall meet accessibility compliance. This should cover any non-web content generated by the system, or related to the promotion, use, or management of the system, including all communications, emails, generated document formats, PDFs, confirmation user action, receipt of acknowledgment, additional correspondence, requests for further information, and use of third-party plugins. Compliance will be assessed against the EN 301 549 content relevant WCAG success criteria in line with regulation requirements and international best practice.(Customised or COTS) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier has provided no evidence to demonstrate levels of WCAG compliance.

(Bespoke) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier has provided no evidence on how they plan to test these areas of the service.

(Any) Supplier has confirmed there are seriously impacting accessibility issues that will not be resolved.

(Customised or COTS) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier provides limited evidence to demonstrate levels of WCAG compliance for existing templates.

(Customised or COTS) The platform produces additional content types. Templates are to be provided by the client. The supplier provides limited information on any limitations for integrating client templates.

(Any) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier provides limited guidance to assist content creators in creating accessible versions of these formats.

(Any) Supplier confirms the platform will not produce any content in formats other than HTML completely contained within the platform.(Customised or COTS) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier provides comprehensive evidence to demonstrate levels of WCAG compliance for existing templates.

(Customised or COTS) The platform produces additional content types. Templates are to be provided by the client. The supplier provides comprehensive information for integrating client templates and evidence that the platform can produce accessible content types.

(Any) The platform produces additional content types. The supplier provides comprehensive guidance to assist content creators in creating accessible versions of these formats and how accessible templates can be successfully delivered as part of the platform.

(Any) Supplier will develop accessible templates as part of implementation with compliance evidence produced for final outputs.N/A
