
1



Table of Contents
4 Echo Setup Guide
5 Getting to Know Alexa
6 Music and Radio
8 Audiobooks
10 Community Hub Skill
11 Alexa Skills
13 Alexa Skills Setup Guide
14 Making Calls with Alexa
15 Making Calls Setup Guide
16 Exercise and Wellness
18 Alexa Privacy
20 Setting Alarms, Timers and Reminders
22 Voice Training
To access a playlist of videos related to the topics in this Guidebook, go to: bit.ly/alexaplaylist

Please fill in as much information as possible prior to your device setup. It is important to have all of the necessary information prepared so that your setup can run smoothly. Allow yourself enough time in case you need to recover passwords.
None of this information will be kept on record by your community or Parker Life.





Basic Commands
All commands begin with "Alexa..."
You can ask Alexa ...
Facts
 Math ? General Questions Time
Weather
& much more
You can tell Alexa to ...
Set Timers Make Lists
Take Notes
& much more

There are several media services that can be used with Alexa to listen to music - including both streaming music and live radio.



There are several media services that can be used with Alexa to read audiobooks. Listening options include subscriptions with monthly fees, individual book purchases, and free audiobooks.

WITH YOUR LIBRARY CARD
Hoopla is library-sponsored service that loans you digital copies of audiobooks, books, music, movies, and more. To listen to audiobooks, you'll need to register for an account and link your library card at hoopladigital.com. You will need to use a computer or smart device to borrow audiobooks. 
Once your account is created, say:
"Alexa, enable Hoopla."
Next, follow these steps:
1. Tap	Menu	Skills & Games       Hoopla Digital       Settings.
2. Tap Link Account.
3. Enter your email and password for Hoopla, then tap Sign In. 
To access an audiobook title that you've borrowed, say: 
"Alexa, ask Hoopla to list my borrowed titles." 
Alexa will ask if you would like to play a title, say Yes to play, or No to skip to the next title.


Community Hub is a skill that was created to connect residents to events and activities in their community. You will be able to use it to find out about events in your community and register for them simply by talking to Alexa. You are also able to access the latest community news, alerts, dining options and even check to see if the mail has arrived.
HOW TO USE
Launch the skill by 	To find out what's happening in your community, you saying:	can use one of these commands:
"Alexa,	"What's happening today?" open	"What's happening this week?"
Community
	Hub."	"What's happening on March 6th?"
"When is the next [Event Name]?"
Alexa will respond by telling you how many events she found and start to list them. After each one, she will ask you if you want to find out more.
To hear details about the event, say "yes."
To hear the next event, say "no."
If you answered "yes," Alexa will read you the details about the event.
To register, say "register."
To have the details repeated, say "hear again."
To hear about the next event, say "go to next."
Once you register for an event, Alexa will ask if you'd like to set a reminder for it. Say "yes," and Alexa will follow up with some questions about when you would like to be reminded.
You can also use one of these commands:
"Alexa, ask Community Hub what's on the menu."
"Alexa, ask Community Hub if the mail is in."
"Alexa, ask Community Hub for community news."

Alexa has thousands of skills available for you to use. You can search for skills on a smart device using your voice! Alexa can give recommendations on skills or search for the most popular ones. 
Alexa skills are apps for your smart speaker!

Search Using Your Voice
Alexa will list skill categories. Repeat a category or ask for more options.
Alexa will ask if you would like to play her top game. Say "Yes" to start.
You can also ask...
For a category:For a mood:For something new:
To install skills just say: 
 "Alexa, enable [name of skill]."
Lifestyle Skills:
Health Skills:WebMDChair Yoga
Senior WorkoutGuided Meditation
EngAGE WorkoutGo Green
Healthy HabitDaily Gratitude
Education Skills:
Games:JeopardyRosetta Stone
Categories GameBirthday & Holiday
20 Questions  Countdown
Escape the RoomDaily Word
Book Info
Audio Skills:
Food Skills:AllRecipesAmbient Sounds
OurGroceriesSleep and Relaxation
Save the Food  Sounds
Nature Sounds
Organization:Lists & Notes
Reminders & Alarms
Routines
To Do List

Alexa's skills add features to your device that do not come pre-installed. There are thousands of skills that you can add to your device, and most are free.   
Searching By Voice
You can find new skills by asking Alexa questions. Alexa can understand many different phrases and ways of asking of asking questions, so if she doesn't understand your question, try rephrasing it. Below is an example of how you can find a top game to play.
1. Ask "Alexa, what are your top skills?"
2. Alexa will list skill categories. Repeat a category or ask for more options.
3. You can say "Alexa, recommend some games."
4. Alexa will ask if you would like to play her top game.
5. You can say "Yes." Alexa will then start the game.
Searching on the Alexa App
1. Open the Alexa App on your tablet or phone. 

2. Tap       in the lower right corner. 
3. Tap on Skills and Games.
4. You can then search for a skill by tapping        , then entering a keyword or the name of a skill.
5. To enable a skill, tap on its name, then tap the Enable to Use button.
Searching on a Computer
1. Go to alexa.amazon.com and sign into your account.
2. Click Skills on the left of the screen. 
3. Enter keyword or the name of a skill in the search area and click        .
4. To enable a skill, click on its name, then click the Enable button.

With the Amazon Echo you can make phone calls using just your voice. This service lets you call any phone number other than 911, or call other Echo devices. All calls made are free.
Making Calls
To start a call, say:

To end a call, say:Receiving Calls
To answer a call, say:	To decline a call, say:

Making Calls Setup Guide
By associating your Echo with a phone number, you can make and receive phone calls hands-free from one Alexa to another.
Follow these steps to setup Alexa to make and receive phone calls:
Setup
1. Open the Alexa app.
2. Tap        More at the bottom right of the screen.
3. Tap       Settings at the top of the screen.
4. Tap Your Profile.
5. Next to Mobile Number tap Add.
6. Enter your cell or tablet phone number then tap Continue.
7. Enter the confirmation code that was texted to you and tap Continue.     Your Echo should chime when connected.
8. Tap        Communicate at the bottom of the screen.
9. Tap Allow to give Amazon access to your contacts.
You are now set up to make and receive Alexa calls!


There are a lot of ways Alexa can help you stay healthy. Alexa can help you find fitness routines, nutrition information, relaxation skills and sleep aids.
Fitness
For a good stretch, you can say: 

There are even workouts made specifically for older adults!

EngAGE Workout promotes strength, 	Body Works: Senior Workout is a flexibility, balance by targeting different 	modified 7-minute workout that can help muscle groups each day of the week.	increase hip, back, and core stability. 
Nutrition
Alexa can give you nutrition information about the foods you eat.
Try saying things like:

Relaxation & Sleep
You can start your day with a dose of positivity or laughter by saying:

If you need some help with sleep, you might ask Alexa to play soothing noises or play a guided sleep meditation. 
Say: 

Remember, to stop any of these skills at any time, simply say:


Alexa privacy controls affords you the ability to control how your data is saved and used. You can manage your data by voice and through the Alexa app. 
To prevent Alexa from recording your voice when not in use, you can physically turn off the microphone on the Echo. 
Press here to mute the 	The Echo also allows you to use microphone.	your voice to delete your most 
		recent interaction with Alexa. 
With the Alexa app you can control how your data is used. Here you can review your voice history, manage skill permissions, and delete your Alexa data. To get started:
1. Open the Alexa app.
2. Tap More on the bottom right.
3. Tap Settings.
4. Tap Alexa Privacy.
Here you can now make changes to your privacy options. To adjust the permissions for specific skills:
1. Tap Manage Skill Permissions.
2. Tap a type of permission, such as "Location             Services" or "Phone Number."
3. Tap the toggle next to a skill to turn that permission      on or off for that skill only.
Adjusting Privacy Settings
Alexa includes privacy settings which prevent Amazon from listening to conversations. Here's how to adjust the settings.

Setting Alarms,
Timers & Reminders
Asking Alexa to wake you up, keep track the time for you, or remind you to do things can be handy ways to use your Echo Dot.




You can train Alexa to understand and recognize your voice as well as the voices of any other users in your household. Training is easy and takes just a few quick steps. 
USING ECHO
1. Say "Alexa, learn my voice."   
2. If a voice profile has previously been created, Alexa will ask who you are. Say "No" until she asks you to state your name.
3. Alexa will ask if you are ready to proceed, say "Yes" to continue.
4. You'll be prompted to speak 4 phrases to Alexa. This is to help Alexa capture the special nuances and intonations of your voice. Do not use a voice remote for training and make sure you are one to five feet away in a quiet environment.
5. Alexa will say, "Okay, you're all done. It's great to put a name to your voice."
6. After that, you can say, "Alexa, who am I?" If the voice training was successful, Alexa will say, "I'm talking to [your name]." If the voice training was not successful, Alexa will say, "I'm not sure who's speaking."            
USING THE ALEXA APP
1. Open the Alexa App.
2. Go to the       Menu.
3. Tap Settings.
4. Tap Account Settings.
5. Tap Recognized Voices.
6. Tap Create a Voice Profile.
7. You'll be prompted to speak 4 phrases to Alexa, continue with step 4 above.
VOICE PROFILES
Voice Profiles allow multiple users in the same household to personalize their Alexa experience. With voice training, Alexa can recognize an individual and deliver results unique to that user. This works well for news briefings, messaging, and personal music accounts. 
1. On a separate device, download the Alexa app.
2. Enter the username and password associated with the existing account.
3. Enter the verification code.    
4. Tap Sign-In.
5. Tap I'm someone else.
6. Enter the name.
7. Verify the phone number.
Instructions on creating a voice profile in the Alexa app can now be followed on this separate device in order to complete the process.

24



















4

5



























