Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
Workbook
Use this workbook to conduct your own heuristic evaluation.
For each of Jakob's 10 Usability Heuristics, look for specific places where the interface fails to adhere to the guideline. Write your recommendations for how to fix those usability issues.
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/
Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
WorkbookEvaluator:
Date:
Product:
Task:1
Visibility of System Status
The design should always keep users informed about what is going on, through appropriate feedback within a reasonable amount of time.
Does the design clearly communicate its state? Is feedback presented quickly after user actions?
2
Match Between System and the Real World
The design should speak the users' language. Use words, phrases, and concepts familiar to the user, rather than internal jargon. Follow real-world conventions, making information appear in a natural and logical order.
Will user be familiar with the terminology used in the design? Do the design's controls follow real-world conventions?
3
User Control and Freedom
Users often perform actions by mistake. They need a clearly marked "emergency exit" to leave the unwanted action without having to go through an extended process.
Does the design allow users to go back a step in the process?
Are exit links easily discoverable?
Can users easily cancel an action? Is Undo and Redo supported?
4
Consistency and Standards
Users should not have to wonder whether different words, situations, or actions mean the same thing. Follow platform and industry conventions.
Does the design follow industry conventions?
Are visual treatments used consistently throughout the design?

5
Error Prevention
Good error messages are important, but the best designs carefully prevent problems from occurring in the first place. Either eliminate error-prone conditions, or check for them and present users with a confirmation option before they commit to the action.
Does the design prevent slips by using helpful constraints?
Does the design warn users before they perform risky actions?
6
Recognition Rather 
Than Recall
Minimize the user's memory load by making elements, actions, and options visible. The user should not have to remember information from one part of the interface to another. Information required to use the design (e.g. field labels or menu items) should be visible or easily retrievable when needed.
 Does the design keep important information visible, so that users do not have to memorize it?  Does the design offer help in-context? 
7
Flexibility and Efficiency of Use
Shortcuts - hidden from novice users - may speed up the interaction for the expert user such that the design can cater to both inexperienced and experienced users. Allow users to tailor frequent actions.
 Does the design provide accelerators like keyboard shortcuts and touch gestures?  Is content and funtionality personalized or customized for individual users?
8
Aesthetic and Minimalist Design
Interfaces should not contain information that is irrelevant or rarely needed. Every extra unit of information in an interface competes with the relevant units of information and diminishes their relative visibility.
Is the visual design and content focused on the essentials?
Have all distracting, unnescessary elements been removed? 
9
Help Users Recognize, Diagnose, and Recover from Errors
Error messages should be expressed in plain language (no error codes), precisely indicate the problem, and constructively suggest a solution.
Does the design use traditional error message visuals, like bold, red text?
Does the design offer a solution that solves the error immediately?
10 Help and Documentation
It's best if the system doesn't need any additional explanation. However, it may be necessary to provide documentation to help users understand how to complete their tasks.
Is help documentation easy to search?
Is help provided in context right at the moment when the user requires it? 


Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
Workbook









Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
Workbook

Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
Workbook





Nielsen Norman Group
Heuristic Evaluation 
Workbook



