
Overview
START HERE
Organization
Product
Infrastructure
IT Accessibility
Case-Specific
AI
Privacy
Institution Evaluation
High-Risk Evaluation
Privacy Analyst Evaluation
Analyst Reference

Sheet 1: START HERE
HECVAT(tm) Solution Provider Response - Start HereVersion 4.1.5Date CompletedInstructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-04Solution Provider Contact NameGNRL-05Solution Provider Contact TitleGNRL-06Solution Provider Contact EmailGNRL-07Solution Provider Contact Phone NumberGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersGNRL-09Employee Work Locations (all)Company InformationAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesCOMP-01Do you have a dedicated software and system development team(s) (e.g., customer support, implementation, product management, etc.)?*COMP-02Describe your organization's business background and ownership structure, including all parent and subsidiary relationships.Include circumstances that may involve offshoring or multinational agreements.COMP-03Have you operated without unplanned disruptions to this solution in the past 12 months?COMP-04Do you have a dedicated information security staff or office?COMP-05Use this area to share information about your environment that will assist those who are assessing your company's data security program.Share any details that would help information security analysts assess your solution.End Table DataRequired QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-01Are you offering a cloud-based product?If you are only offering a service, or are offering a product that is not cloud-based, answer "no".REQU-02Does your product or service have an interface?This includes any interface for end users and interfaces used by administrators at the institution.REQU-03Are you providing consulting services?REQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?REQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?Answer "yes" if your solution handles personal health information (PHI), either directly or via a third party.REQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?Answer yes if your solution handles PCI (credit card) information, either directly or via a third party.REQU-07Does operating your solution require the institution to operate a physical or virtual appliance in their own environment or to provide inbound firewall exceptions to allow your employees to remotely administer systems in the institution's environment?REQU-08Does your solution have access to personal or institutional data?This includes patient data, student data, employment data, human research data, financial data, etc.End Table DataNote: The "Organization" tab is required for ALL products and services. Copyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 2: Organization
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - OrganizationVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-04Solution Provider Contact NameGNRL-05Solution Provider Contact TitleGNRL-06Solution Provider Contact EmailGNRL-07Solution Provider Contact Phone NumberGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersDocumentationAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesDOCU-01Do you have a well-documented business continuity plan (BCP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*DOCU-02Do you have a well-documented disaster recovery plan (DRP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*DOCU-03Have you undergone a SSAE 18/SOC 2 audit?DOCU-04Do you conform with a specific industry standard security framework (e.g., NIST Cybersecurity Framework, CIS Controls, ISO 27001, etc.)?DOCU-05Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams, including a full description of the data flow for all components of the system?DOCU-06Does your organization have a data privacy policy?DOCU-07Do you have a documented, and currently implemented, employee onboarding and offboarding policy?End Table DataAssessment of Third PartiesAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesTHRD-01Do you perform security assessments of third-party companies with which you share data (e.g., hosting providers, cloud services, PaaS, IaaS, SaaS)?*THRD-02Do you have contractual language in place with third parties governing access to institutional data?*List each third party and why institutional data is shared with them. Format example: [Third Party Name] - ReasonTHRD-03Do the contracts in place with these third parties address liability in the event of a data breach?*THRD-04Do you have an implemented third-party management strategy?*Robust answers from the solution provider improve the quality and efficiency of the security assessment process.THRD-05Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your hardware supply chain (e.g., telecommunications equipment, export licensing, computing devices)?Make sure you address any national or regional regulations.End Table DataChange ManagementAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesCHNG-01Will the institution be notified of major changes to your environment that could impact the institution's security posture?*CHNG-02Does the system support client customizations from one release to another?*Ensure that all relevant details pertaining to CHNG-06 are clearly stated in your response.CHNG-03Do you have an implemented system configuration management process (e.g., secure "gold" images, etc.)?*CHNG-04Do you have a documented change management process?CHNG-05Does your change management process minimally include authorization, impact analysis, testing, and validation before moving changes to production?CHNG-06Does your change management process verify that all required third-party libraries and dependencies are still supported with each major change?CHNG-07Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, managing how critical patches are applied to all systems and applications?CHNG-08Have you implemented policies and procedures that guide how security risks are mitigated until patches can be applied?CHNG-09Do clients have the option to not participate in or postpone an upgrade to a new release?CHNG-10Do you have a fully implemented solution support strategy that defines how many concurrent versions you support?List the current version you support and what percentage of customers are utilizing that version.CHNG-11Do you have a release schedule for product updates?CHNG-12Do you have a technology roadmap, for at least the next two years, for enhancements and bug fixes for the solution being assessed?CHNG-13Can solution updates be completed without institutional involvement (i.e., technically or organizationally)?CHNG-14Are upgrades or system changes installed during off-peak hours or in a manner that does not impact the customer?CHNG-15Do procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-fact approval)?CHNG-16Do you have a systems management and configuration strategy that encompasses servers, appliances, cloud services, applications, and mobile devices (company and employee owned)?End Table DataPolicies, Processes, and ProceduresAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPPPR-01Do you have a documented patch management process?*PPPR-02Can your organization comply with institutional policies on privacy and data protection with regard to users of institutional systems, if required?*PPPR-03Is your company subject to the institution's geographic region's laws and regulations?*State the country that governs and regulates your company.PPPR-04Can you accommodate encryption requirements using open standards?PPPR-05Do you have a documented systems development life cycle (SDLC)?PPPR-06Do you perform background screenings or multi-state background checks on all employees prior to their first day of work?PPPR-07Do you require new employees to fill out agreements and review policies?PPPR-08Do you have a documented information security policy?PPPR-09Are information security principles designed into the product lifecycle?PPPR-10Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?PPPR-11Do you have an information security awareness program?PPPR-12Is security awareness training mandatory for all employees?PPPR-13Do you have process and procedure(s) documented, and currently followed, that require a review and update of the access list(s) for privileged accounts?PPPR-14Do you have documented, and currently implemented, internal audit processes and procedures?PPPR-15Does your organization have physical security controls and policies in place?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 3: Product
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - ProductVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersRequired QuestionsAnswerGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-01Are you offering a cloud-based product?If you are only offering a service, or are offering a product that is not cloud-based, answer "no".End Table DataAuthentication, Authorization, and Account ManagementAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAAAI-01Does your solution support single sign-on (SSO) protocols for user and administrator authentication?*Answer "yes" only if user AND administrator authentication is supported. If partially supported, answer "no." Ensure you respond to any guidance in the Additional Information column.AAAI-02For customers not using SSO, does your solution support local authentication protocols for user and administrator authentication?*AAAI-03For customers not using SSO, can you enforce password/passphrase complexity requirements (provided by the institution)?*AAAI-04For customers not using SSO, does the system have password complexity or length limitations and/or restrictions?*Answer "yes" if your solution has internal limits to password complexity (max length, certain special characters unsupported, etc.).AAAI-05For customers not using SSO, do you have documented password/passphrase reset procedures that are currently implemented in the system and/or customer support?*AAAI-06Does your organization participate in InCommon or another eduGAIN-affiliated trust federation?*AAAI-07Are there any passwords/passphrases hard-coded into your systems or solutions?*AAAI-08Are you storing any passwords in plaintext?*AAAI-09Are audit logs available that include AT LEAST all of the following: login, logout, actions performed, and source IP address?*AAAI-10Describe or provide a reference to the (a) system capability to log security/authorization changes, as well as user and administrator security events (i.e., physical or electronic), such as login failures, access denied, changes accepted; and (b) all requirements necessary to implement logging and monitoring on the system. Include (c) information about SIEM/log collector usage.*Ensure that all elements of AAAI-10 are clearly stated in your response.AAAI-11Can you provide the institution documentation regarding the retention period for those logs, how logs are protected, and whether they are accessible to the customer (and if so, how)?*Ensure that all elements of AAAI-11 are clearly stated in your response.AAAI-12For customers not using SSO, does your application support integration with other authentication and authorization systems?AAAI-13Do you allow the customer to specify attribute mappings for any needed information beyond a user identifier? (e.g., Reference eduPerson, ePPA/ePPN/ePE)AAAI-14For customers not using SSO, does your application support directory integration for user accounts?AAAI-15Does your solution support any of the following web SSO standards: SAML2 (with redirect flow), OIDC, CAS, or other?An answer of "yes" should be well-supported in the Additional Information column, and all elements of interest should be sufficiently addressed.AAAI-16Do you support differentiation between email address and user identifier?AAAI-17For customers not using SSO, does your application and/or user frontend/portal support multifactor authentication (e.g., Duo, Google Authenticator, OTP, etc.)?AAAI-18Does your application automatically lock the session or log out an account after a period of inactivity?End Table DataDataAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesDATA-01Will the institution's data be stored on any devices (database servers, file servers, SAN, NAS, etc.) configured with non-RFC 1918/4193 (i.e., publicly routable) IP addresses?*DATA-02Is the transport of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., system-to-client)?*DATA-03Is the storage of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., disk encryption, at-rest, files, and within a running database)?*DATA-04Do all cryptographic modules in use in your solution conform to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS PUB 140-2 or 140-3)?*DATA-05Will the institution's data be available within the system for a period of time at the completion of this contract?*DATA-06Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained even through a provider acquisition or bankruptcy event?*DATA-07Do backups containing the institution's data ever leave the institution's data zone either physically or via network routing?*DATA-08Is media used for long-term retention of business data and archival purposes stored in a secure, environmentally protected area?*DATA-09At the completion of this contract, will data be returned to the institution and/or deleted from all your systems and archives?Please specify if it will be returned, deleted, or both. DATA-10Can the institution extract a full or partial backup of data?DATA-11Do current backups include all operating system software, utilities, security software, application software, and data files necessary for recovery?DATA-12Are you performing off-site backups (i.e., digitally moved off site)?DATA-13Are physical backups taken off-site (i.e., physically moved off site)?DATA-14Are data backups encrypted?DATA-15Do you have a media handling process that is documented and currently implemented that meets established business needs and regulatory requirements, including end-of-life, repurposing, and data-sanitization procedures?DATA-16Does the process described in DATA-15 adhere to DoD 5220.22-M and/or NIST SP 800-88 standards?DATA-17Does your staff (or third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?DATA-18Do you have a documented and currently implemented strategy for securing employee workstations when they work remotely (i.e., not in a trusted computing environment)?DATA-19Does the environment provide for dedicated single-tenant capabilities? If not, describe how your solution or environment separates data from different customers (e.g., logically, physically, single tenancy, multi-tenancy).DATA-20Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained by the institution?DATA-21In the event of imminent bankruptcy, closing of business, or retirement of service, will you provide 90 days for customers to get their data out of the system and migrate applications?DATA-22Are involatile backup copies made according to predefined schedules and securely stored and protected?Ensure that response addresses involatile storage and lists retention periods.DATA-23Do you have a cryptographic key management process (generation, exchange, storage, safeguards, use, vetting, and replacement) that is documented and currently implemented, for all system components (e.g., database, system, web, etc.)?Summarize your cryptographic key management process.End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 4: Infrastructure
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - InfrastructureVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersRequired QuestionsAnswerGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-01Are you offering a cloud-based product?If you are only offering a service, or are offering a product that is not cloud-based, answer "no".End Table DataApplication/Service SecurityAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAPPL-01Are access controls for institutional accounts based on structured rules, such as role-based access control (RBAC), attribute-based access control (ABAC), or policy-based access control (PBAC)?*This includes end users, administrators, service accounts, etc. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.APPL-02Are you using a web application firewall (WAF)?*APPL-03Are only currently supported operating system(s), software, and libraries leveraged by the system(s)/application(s) that will have access to institution's data?*If the web application only works with a subset of modern supported browsers, please indicate that here.APPL-04Does your application require access to location or GPS data?*APPL-05Does your application provide separation of duties between security administration, system administration, and standard user functions?*APPL-06Do you subject your code to static code analysis and/or static application security testing prior to release?*APPL-07Do you have software testing processes (dynamic or static) that are established and followed?*APPL-08Are access controls for staff within your organization based on structured rules, such as RBAC, ABAC, or PBAC?This includes system administrators and third-party personnel with access to the system. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.APPL-09Does the system provide data input validation and error messages?APPL-10Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your software supply chain (e.g., libraries, repositories, frameworks, etc.)?Include any in-house developed or contract development.APPL-11Have your developers been trained in secure coding techniques?APPL-12Was your application developed using secure coding techniques?APPL-13If mobile, is the application available from a trusted source (e.g., App Store, Google Play Store)?Select N/A if there is no mobile version of your app.APPL-14Do you have a fully implemented policy or procedure that details how your employees obtain administrator access to institutional instance of the application?End Table DataDatacenterAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesDCTR-01Select your hosting option.If you are using an option not listed, or a combination of options, select "Other." Your selection here will determine which questions below are required.DCTR-02Is a SOC 2 Type 2 report available for the hosting environment?DCTR-03Are you generally able to accommodate storing each institution's data within its geographic region?DCTR-04Are the data centers staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week (i.e., 24 x 7 x 365)?DCTR-05Are your servers separated from other companies via a physical barrier, such as a cage or hard walls?DCTR-06Does a physical barrier fully enclose the physical space, preventing unauthorized physical contact with any of your devices?*DCTR-07Are your primary and secondary data centers geographically diverse?DCTR-08Is the service hosted in a high-availability environment?DCTR-09Is redundant power available for all data centers where institutional data will reside?DCTR-10Are redundant power strategies tested?*DCTR-11Does the center where the data will reside have cooling and fire-suppression systems that are active and regularly tested?DCTR-12Do you have Internet Service Provider (ISP) redundancy?DCTR-13Does every data center where the institution's data will reside have multiple telephone company or network provider entrances to the facility?DCTR-14Do you require multifactor authentication for all administrative accounts in your environment?DCTR-15Are you using your cloud provider's available hardening tools or pre-hardened images?DCTR-16Does your cloud solution provider have access to your encryption keys?Firewalls, IDS, IPS, and NetworkingAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesFIDP-01Are you utilizing a stateful packet inspection (SPI) firewall?*FIDP-02Do you have a documented policy for firewall change requests?*FIDP-03Have you implemented an intrusion detection system (network-based)?*FIDP-04Do you employ host-based intrusion detection?*FIDP-05Are audit logs available for all changes to the network, firewall, IDS, and IPS systems?*FIDP-06Is authority for firewall change approval documented? Please list approver names or titles in Additional Info.FIDP-07Have you implemented an intrusion prevention system (network-based)?FIDP-08Do you employ host-based intrusion prevention?FIDP-09Are you employing any next-generation persistent threat (NGPT) monitoring?FIDP-10Is intrusion monitoring performed internally or by a third-party service?In addition to stating your intrusion monitoring strategy, provide a brief summary of its implementation.FIDP-11Do you monitor for intrusions on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?End Table DataIncident HandlingAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesHFIH-01Do you have a formal incident response plan?HFIH-02Do you either have an internal incident response team or retain an external team?HFIH-03Do you have the capability to respond to incidents on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?HFIH-04Do you carry cyber-risk insurance to protect against unforeseen service outages, data that is lost or stolen, and security incidents?End Table DataVulnerability ManagementAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesVULN-01Are your systems and applications scanned with an authenticated user account for vulnerabilities (that are remediated) prior to new releases?*VULN-02Will you provide results of application and system vulnerability scans to the institution?*VULN-03Will you allow the institution to perform its own vulnerability testing and/or scanning of your systems and/or application, provided that testing is performed at a mutually agreed upon time and date?*VULN-04Have your systems and applications had a third-party security assessment completed in the last year?VULN-05Do you regularly scan for common web application security vulnerabilities (e.g., SQL injection, XSS, XSRF, etc.)?Ensure that all elements of VULN-05 are clearly stated in your response.VULN-06Are your systems and applications regularly scanned externally for vulnerabilities?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 5: IT Accessibility
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - IT AccessibilityVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersRequired QuestionsAnswerGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-02Does your product or service have an interface?This includes any interface for end users and interfaces used by administrators at the institution.End Table DataIT AccessibilityAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesITAC-01Solution Provider Accessibility Contact NameITAC-02Solution Provider Accessibility Contact TitleITAC-03Solution Provider Accessibility Contact EmailITAC-04Solution Provider Accessibility Contact Phone NumberITAC-05Web Link to Accessibility Statement or VPATVPAT can also be added as an attachmentITAC-06Has a VPAT or ACR been created or updated for the solution and version under consideration within the past 12 months?*If your answer is "I do not know," select "no." If the VPAT/ACR is for an older version of the product or has not been updated, its information does not accurately reflect the accessibility of the product under consideration and the response should be "no." Provide a link or attachment to the most recent VPAT/ACR.ITAC-07Will your company agree to meet your stated accessibility standard or WCAG 2.1 AA as part of your contractual agreement for the solution?*ITAC-08Does the solution substantially conform to WCAG 2.1 AA?*Solutions "substantially conform" if they entirely meet WCAG 2.1 AA or if almost all user and administrator features conform. Documentation about limitations and/or workarounds should be provided where WCAG conformance is not presently achieved. If the solution substantially conforms to a newer standard such as WCAG 2.2 AA, answer "yes."ITAC-09Do you have a documented and implemented process for reporting and tracking accessibility issues?*Reporting and fixing accessibility issues is critical to a mature process. If the process for this question is merely a "feature request" and tracker, the answer to this question should be "no." ITAC-10Do you have documentation to support the accessibility features of your solution?If specific configurations, settings, themes, author guides, or instructions are needed to ensure accessibility, are instructions on how to do so provided for administrators and end users?ITAC-11Has a third-party expert conducted an audit of the most recent version of your solution?Audit results, including VPAT/ACRs, are voluntary reports often generated by the creator of the product. Audits conducted and reports generated by expert third parties give greater confidence to customers.ITAC-12Do you have a documented and implemented process for verifying accessibility conformance?ITAC-13Have you adopted a technical or legal standard of conformance for the solution?Various federal and state governments in the United States and around the world have mandated accessibility technical requirements that should be considered and may be required when selling solutions to institutions in these jurisdictions.ITAC-14Can you provide a current, detailed accessibility roadmap with delivery timelines?A detailed accessibility roadmap should reference improvements and progress on known accessibility issues as appropriate but does not necessarily need to list unreleased product features.ITAC-15Do you expect your staff to maintain a current skill set in IT accessibility?How do you ensure that your professional staff keeps current with digital accessibility laws and best practices? Is your staff able to evaluate and test this product with assistive technologies such as a screen reader or alternative input devices? Examples of staff certification may include IAAP certifications <https://www.accessibilityassociation.org/s/professional-certifications> or §508 Trusted Tester <https://www.dhs.gov/trusted-tester>.ITAC-16Do you have documented processes and procedures for implementing accessibility into your development lifecycle?Describe where accessibility falls in the development and product lifecycle. Is it at the beginning of your project development or after the product is otherwise complete before launch? Do you incorporate accessibility in your development methods, such as Agile scrums? Does your customer-facing accessibility reporting match your development processes (i.e., Agile methods are best represented using a roadmap and timeline; revised VPAT/ACRs provide a snapshot in time of a given release)?ITAC-17Can all functions of the application or service be performed using only the keyboard?ITAC-18Does your product rely on activating a special "accessibility mode," a "lite version," or using an alternate interface (including "overlay" or AI-based alternates) for accessibility purposes?Third-party overlays or add-ons are not sufficient for products to conform with accessibility standards. If there is an accessibility mode, does it address a specific accessibility need? Are plans in place to remove the accessible version, and are these distinctions delineated on your roadmap and timeline?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 6: Case-Specific
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - Case-Specific QuestionsVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersRequired QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-03Are you providing consulting services?REQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?Answer "yes" if your solution handles personal health information (PHI), either directly or via a third party.REQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?Answer yes if your solution handles PCI (credit card) information, either directly or via a third party.REQU-07Does operating your solution require the institution to operate a physical or virtual appliance in their own environment or to provide inbound firewall exceptions to allow your employees to remotely administer systems in the institution's environment?End Table DataConsulting ServicesAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesCONS-01Will the consultant require access to the institution's network resources?*CONS-02Has the consultant received training on (sensitive, HIPAA, PCI, etc.) data handling?*CONS-03Is the data encrypted (at rest) while in the consultant's possession?*CONS-04Can access be restricted based on source IP address?*CONS-05Will the consulting take place on-premises?CONS-06Will the consultant require access to hardware in the institution's data centers?CONS-07Will the consultant require an account within the institution's domain (@*.edu)?CONS-08Will any data be transferred to the consultant's possession?CONS-09Will the consultant need remote access to the institution's network or systems?End Table DataHIPAA Compliance AnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesHIPA-01Do your workforce members receive regular training related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules and the HITECH Act?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-02Have you identified areas of risk?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-03Have the relevant policies/plans been tested?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-04Have you entered into a Business Associate Agreements with all subcontractors who may have access to protected health information (PHI)?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-05Do you monitor or receive information regarding changes in HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-06Has your organization designated HIPAA Privacy and Security officers as required by the rules?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-07Do you comply with the requirements of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-08Have you conducted a risk analysis as required under the HIPAA Security Rule?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-09Have you taken actions to mitigate the identified risks?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-10Does your application require user and system administrator password changes at a frequency no greater than 90 days?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-11Does your application require users to set their own password after an administrator reset or on first use of the account?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-12Does your application lock out an account after a number of failed login attempts?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-13Does your application automatically lock or log-out an account after a period of inactivity?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-14Are passwords visible in plain text, whether when stored or entered, including service level accounts (i.e., database accounts, etc.)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-15If the application is institution-hosted, can all service level and administrative account passwords be changed by the institution?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-16Does your application provide the ability to define user access levels?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-17Does your application support varying levels of access to administrative tasks defined individually per user?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-18Does your application support varying levels of access to records based on user ID?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-19Is there a limit to the number of groups to which a user can be assigned?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-20Do accounts used for solution provider-supplied remote support abide by the same authentication policies and access logging as the rest of the system?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-21Does the application log record access including specific user, date/time of access, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-22Does the application log administrative activity, such as user account access changes and password changes, including specific user, date/time of changes, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-23Do you retain logs for at least as long as required by HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-24Can the application logs be archived?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-25Can the application logs be saved externally?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-26Do you have a disaster recovery plan and emergency mode operation plan?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-27Can you provide a HIPAA compliance attestation document?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-28Are you willing to enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.HIPA-29Do your data backup and retention policies and practices meet HIPAA requirements?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.End Table DataPayment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)AnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPCID-01Do you have a current, executed within the past year, Attestation of Compliance (AoC) or Report on Compliance (RoC)?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-02Is the application listed as an approved Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS) application?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-03Does the system or solutions use a third party to collect, store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-04Do your systems or solutions store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-05Are you compliant with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-06Are you classified as a service provider?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-07Are you on the list of Visa approved service providers?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-08Are you classified as a merchant? If so, what level (1, 2, 3, 4)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-09Describe the architecture employed by the system to verify and authorize credit card transactions.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-10What payment processors/gateways does the system support?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-11Can the application be installed in a PCI DSS-compliant manner?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionPCID-12Include documentation describing the system's abilities to comply with the PCI DSS and any features or capabilities of the system that must be added or changed in order to operate in compliance with the standards.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionEnd Table DataOn-Premises Data SolutionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesOPEM-01Do you support role-based access control (RBAC) for system administrators?OPEM-02Can your employees access customer systems remotely?OPEM-03Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams including a full description of the data communications architecture for all components of the system?OPEM-04Do you require remote management of the system?OPEM-05If you answered "yes" to OPEM-04, are your remote actions and changes logged or otherwise visible to the campus?OPEM-06If you maintain remote access to the system, will you handle data in a FERPA-compliant manner?OPEM-07Do you support campus status monitoring through SNMPv3 or other means?OPEM-08Describe or provide a reference to any other safeguards used to monitor for malicious activity.Please detail your monitoring strategyOPEM-09Describe how long your organization has conducted business in this area.Include the number of years and in what capacity.OPEM-10Do you have existing higher education customers?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 7: AI
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - AIVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersRequired QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?End Table DataAI Qualifying QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAIQU-01Does your solution leverage machine learning (ML) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?Answer "yes" even if you do not create your own machine learning solutions, and answer the questions as they apply to your contractual relationship with the third party you utilize.AIQU-02Does your solution leverage a large language model (LLM) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?Answer "yes" even if you do not train your own LLM models, and answer the questions as they apply to your contractual relationship with the third party you utilize.End Table DataGeneral AI QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAIGN-01Does your solution have an AI risk model when developing or implementing your solution's AI model?*Examples include NIST AI RMF, OWASP Top 10, RAFT, and MITRE ATLAS.AIGN-02Can your solution's AI features be disabled by tenant and/or user?*AIGN-03Have your staff completed responsible AI training?*AIGN-04Please describe the capabilities of your solution's AI features.Describe capabilities such as content (text, image, audio, speech, video, or code) generation, visual interpretation, and predictive analytics. This encompasses all AI implementations, including third-party AI features. Clarify use cases or limits of the model.AIGN-05Does your solution support business rules to protect sensitive data from being ingested by the AI model?End Table DataAI PolicyAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAIPL-01Are your AI developer's policies, processes, procedures, and practices across the organization related to the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks conspicuously posted, unambiguous, and implemented effectively?*AIPL-02Have you identified and measured AI risks?*AIPL-03In the event of an incident, can your solution's AI features be disabled in a timely manner?*AIPL-04If disabled because of an incident, can your solution's AI features be re-enabled in a timely manner?*AIPL-05Do you have documented technical and procedural processes to address potential negative impacts of AI as described by the AI Risk Management Framework (RMF)?Responsible AI development per NIST AI RMF, page 25.End Table DataAI Data SecurityAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAISC-01If sensitive data is introduced to your solution's AI model, can the data be removed from the AI model by request?*Please answer based on whether your AI model supports the removal or unlearning of sensitive data, whether it is introduced intentionally or unintentionally. Consider whether data can be traced and deleted from training sets, vector stores, memory, or other components of the AI system. This includes data removal in compliance with privacy regulations and customer requests.AISC-02Is user input data used to influence your solution's AI model?*Please answer based on whether your solution uses user input data (e.g., prompts, uploads, queries) to fine-tune, train, or otherwise influence the behavior of your AI model. Consider any use of user data for model improvement, personalization, or aggregated learning.AISC-03Do you provide logging for your solution's AI feature(s) that includes user, date, and action taken?*Please answer based on whether your AI features generate audit logs that record user identity, timestamp, and actions taken. Include log retention, immutability, access for administrators or auditors, and how logs support compliance and incident response.AISC-04Please describe how you validate user inputs.Please describe how your solution validates user inputs, including detection of anomalies, malicious inputs, and sensitive data. Indicate where validation occurs and how it supports security and compliance.AISC-05Do you plan for and mitigate supply-chain risk related to your AI features?End Table DataAI Machine LearningAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAIML-01Do you separate ML training data from your ML solution data?*Please answer based on whether training data is kept separate from production data to protect institutional information. Include how organizational data is segregated, anonymized, or excluded from training, and state whether institutions can opt out of data use for model improvement.AIML-02Do you authenticate and verify your ML model's feedback?*AIML-03Is your ML training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?AIML-04Is your ML training data monitored and audited?AIML-05Have you limited access to your ML training data to only staff with an explicit business need?AIML-06Have you implemented adversarial training or other model defense mechanisms to protect your ML-related features?AIML-07Do you make your ML model transparent through documentation and log inputs and outputs?AIML-08Do you watermark your ML training data?End Table DataAI Large Language Model (LLM)AnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesAILM-01Do you limit your solution's LLM privileges by default?*AILM-02Is your LLM training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?*AILM-03Do any actions taken by your solution's LLM features or plugins require human intervention?*AILM-04Do you limit multiple LLM model plugins being called as part of a single input?*AILM-05Do you limit your solution's LLM resource use per request, per step, and per action?AILM-06Do you leverage LLM model tuning or other model validation mechanisms?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSEEnd of worksheet 
Sheet 8: Privacy
HECVAT Solution Provider Response - PrivacyVersion 4.1.5Date Completed12/30/1899Instructions for Solution Providers1. Complete the "Start Here" tab and review the "Required Questions" guidance to find the other sections are required for your product or service.2. Complete the "Organization" tab and the applicable questions in each of the next 5 tabs (Product through Privacy) that apply, based on your answers to the "Required Questions."3. Guidance in column E may change based on your answers to prompt details in "Additional Information." If leaving an answer blank, you must also state why in "Additional Information". 4. DO NOT complete any fields in the "Evaluation" sheets or the "Analyst Notes" column.5. Return the completed file to institutions.* Denotes critical questions. Critical questions are those deemed most important to institutions by higher education volunteers.For full instructions, please visit educause.edu/HECVATGeneral InformationAnswerGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersGNRL-09Employee Work Locations (all)Required QuestionsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesREQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?REQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?Answer "yes" if your solution handles personal health information (PHI), either directly or via a third party.REQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?Answer yes if your solution handles PCI (credit card) information, either directly or via a third party.REQU-08Does your solution have access to personal or institutional data?This includes patient data, student data, employment data, human research data, financial data, etc.End Table DataGeneral PrivacyAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPRGN-01Does your solution process FERPA-related data?FERPA-related data includes any data maintained by (or on behalf of) the institution that is directly related to an identifiable student.PRGN-02Does your solution process GDPR-related or PIPL-related data?GDPR data includes any data related to an identified or identifiable natural person physically located in the European Economic Area (EEA).
PIPL-related data includes any personal data related to an identified or identifiable person located in the People's Republic of China (PRC)PRGN-03Does your solution process personal data regulated by state law(s) (e.g., CCPA)?PRGN-04Does your solution process user-provided data that may contain regulated information?PRGN-05Web Link to Product/Service Privacy NoticeIf multiple notices are implicated, provide all that apply. If any other documents are incorporated by reference, provide them as well.End Table DataPrivacy-Specific Company DetailsAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPCOM-01Have you had a personal data breach in the past three years that involved reporting to a governmental agency, notice to individuals (including voluntary notice), or notice to another organization or institution?*PCOM-02Use this area to share information about your privacy practices that will assist those who are assessing your company data privacy program.*Share any additional details that would help data privacy analysts assess your solution.PCOM-03Have you had any violations of your internal privacy policies or violations of applicable privacy law in the past 36 months?PCOM-04Do you have a dedicated data privacy staff or office?This can include another office, such as information security, dedicated to privacy protection.End Table DataPrivacy-Specific DocumentationAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPDOC-01If you have completed a SOC 2 audit, does it include the Privacy Trust Service Principle?SOC 2 Type II audits can be conducted for any or all of five trust principles (confidentiality, integrity, availability, security, and privacy). Answer "yes" if your audit included the privacy principle.PDOC-02Do you conform with a specific industry-standard privacy framework (e.g., NIST Privacy Framework, GDPR, ISO 27701)?Standard privacy frameworks help organizations enhance data protection, mitigate privacy risks, and demonstrate compliance with appropriate industry and regulatory standards. This is particularly important when providing services in different jurisdictions.PDOC-03Does your employee onboarding and offboarding policy include training of employees on information security and data privacy?End Table DataPrivacy of Third PartiesAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPTHP-01Do you have contractual agreements with third parties that require them to maintain standards and to comply with all regulatory requirements?*Inclusion of language in contractual agreements ensures third parties are aware of and have agreed to their obligations to maintain standards and comply with all regulatory requirements in regards to protection of personal data they handle on behalf of your organization.PTHP-02Do you perform privacy impact assessments of third parties that collect, process, or have access to personal data to ensure they meet industry and regulatory standards and to mitigate harmful, unethical, or discriminatory impacts on data subjects?Privacy impact assessments ensure that third-party collection, processing, or access to personal data aligns with and supports your organization's own efforts and commitments to clients. This is particularly important when a specific third party operates from or is subject to a jurisdiction different from that of your organization.End Table DataPrivacy Change ManagementAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPCHG-01Does your change management process include privacy review and approval?The change management process minimizes disruption and maximizes benefits and should contain a privacy review process.PCHG-02Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, guiding how privacy risks are mitigated until they can be resolved?Policy and procedure should include specific steps to take in the process of mitigating privacy risks.End Table DataPrivacy of Sensitive DataAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPDAT-01Do you collect, process, or store demographic information?*Demographic information is generally defined as the statistical characteristics of a population used to study and understand certain aspects of that population. It can include characteristics such as age, gender, ethnicity, education, religion, geolocation, and occupation. If the information being collected, processed, or stored falls under a particular regulation (or law), check that regulation for a specific definition of demographic information.PDAT-02Do you capture or create genetic, biometric, or behaviometric information (e.g., facial recognition or fingerprints)?*Genetic information would include information about genetic tests, genetic tests of family members, actual manifestations of diseases, and family medical records. Biometric information includes elements such as facial recognition, fingerprints, and voice recognition.
Behaviometric information is behavioral information collected and analyzed in order to understand human behavior. The exact elements collected may depend on the requirements of an applicable regulation or law.PDAT-03Do you combine institutional data (including "de-identified," "anonymized," or otherwise masked data) with personal data from any other sources?*Institutional data is created, collected, maintained, transmitted, or stored by or for a college or university to conduct operations. Many institutions have their own specific definitions. Institutional data would include data such as financial information, student education records, faculty/staff/alumni data, research data, and data collected for government reporting purposes.PDAT-04Is institutional data coming into or going out of the United States at any point during collection, processing, storage, or archiving?Given the vast number of privacy regulations and laws throughout the world, it is important to know when, where, why, and how institutional data is being shared outside the United States. This information is necessary to ensure compliance and to protect the institutional data.PDAT-05Do you capture device information (e.g., IP address, MAC address)?Device information can be captured for a variety of reasons, from analytics to marketing to network management and security. It is important to know the details in order to be clear on the privacy implications.PDAT-06Does any part of this service/project involve a web/app tracking component (e.g., use of web-tracking pixels, cookies)?Web tracking can be used to identify users via their IP address, login information, browser information, etc.PDAT-07Does your staff (or a third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?Accessing institutional data may be necessary for legitimate business purposes.PDAT-08Will you handle personal data in a manner compliant with all relevant laws, regulations, and applicable institution policies?End Table DataPrivacy Policies and ProceduresAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesPRPO-01Do you have a documented privacy management process?PRPO-02Are privacy principles designed into the product lifecycle (i.e., privacy-by-design)?The question is assessing your compliance with Privacy by Design (PbD) principles. This concept, embedded in regulations such as GDPR (Article 25) and other global privacy laws, requires that privacy is not an afterthought-it must be part of the design and architecture of systems and processes from the outset.PRPO-03Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?PRPO-04Will you comply with the institution's policies regarding user privacy and data protection?These policies may include specific user consent practices, data classification standards, and handling of sensitive information.PRPO-05Is your company subject to the laws and regulations of the institution's geographic region?Indicates whether your organization is legally bound by state, federal, or local laws where the institution operates.PRPO-06Do you have a privacy awareness/training program?*Privacy awareness/training refers to the ongoing education provided to individuals who handle sensitive data to ensure they understand privacy obligations, data protection principles, and regulatory requirements (e.g., FERPA, HIPAA, GDPR).PRPO-07Is privacy awareness training mandatory for all employees?PRPO-08Is AI privacy and ethics awareness/training required for all employees who work with AI?PRPO-09Do you have any decision-making processes that are completely automated (i.e., there is no human involvement)?Examples of such automated decisions could include automatically denying or approving user access requests, flagging or blocking transactions based on risk scores, or AI-driven decisions that affect user outcomes (e.g., eligibility, grading, pricing).PRPO-10Do you have a documented process for managing automated processing, including validations, monitoring, and data subject requests?PRPO-11Do you have a documented policy for sharing information with law enforcement?PRPO-12Do you share any institutional data with law enforcement without a valid warrant or subpoena?*PRPO-13Does your incident response team include a privacy analyst/officer?Provide an overview of your incident response team membership and its charge, highlighting the privacy analyst/officer.End Table DataInternational PrivacyAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesINTL-01Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in the European Economic Area (EEA)?See GDPR Chapter 1, Art. 4, for definitions.INTL-02Do you have a data protection officer (DPO)?See GDPR Chapter 4, Section 4, for DPO information.INTL-03Will you sign appropriate GDPR Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs) with the institution?See GDPR Chapter 5, Art. 46, for SCC information.INTL-04Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in China?See PIPL Chapter 1 for definitions.INTL-05Do you comply with PIPL security, privacy, and data localization requirements?See PIPL Chapter 5 for requirements.End Table DataData PrivacyAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesDRPV-01Have you performed a Data Privacy Impact Assessment for the solution/project?DRPV-02Do you provide an end-user privacy notice about privacy policies and procedures that identify the purpose(s) for which personal information is collected, used, retained, and disclosed?DRPV-03Do you describe the choices available to the individual and obtain implicit or explicit consent with respect to the collection, use, and disclosure of personal information?DRPV-04Do you collect personal information only for the purpose(s) identified in the agreement with an institution or, if there is none, the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice?This includes quality assurance, marketing and advertising, etc.DRPV-05Do you have a documented list of personal data your service maintains?DRPV-06Do you retain personal information for only as long as necessary to fulfill the stated purpose(s) or as required by law or regulation and thereafter appropriately dispose of such information?DRPV-07Do you provide individuals with access to their personal information for review and update (i.e., data subject rights)?Such processes would include descriptions of request processes individuals can follow to review their information and written processes a data subject may use to ask for changes or corrections to data held about them.DRPV-08Do you disclose personal information to third parties only for the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice or with the implicit or explicit consent of the individual?DRPV-09Do you protect personal information against unauthorized access (both physical and logical)?DRPV-10Do you maintain accurate, complete, and relevant personal information for the purposes identified in the privacy notice?DRPV-11Do you have procedures to address privacy-related noncompliance complaints and disputes?DRPV-12Do you "anonymize," "de-identify," or otherwise mask personal data?DRPV-13Do you or your subprocessors use or disclose "anonymized," "de-identified," or otherwise masked data for any purpose other than those identified in the agreement with an institution (e.g., sharing with ad networks or data brokers, marketing, creation of profiles, analytics unrelated to services provided to institution)?DRPV-14Do you certify stop-processing requests, including any data that is processed by a third party on your behalf?Provide evidence of existing processes or policies. The internal privacy policy should explain your organization's policies and practices regarding the collection of personal information and other data about individuals.DRPV-15Do you have a process to review code for ethical considerations?End Table DataPrivacy and AIAnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesDPAI-01Does your service use AI for the processing of institutional data?DPAI-02Is any institutional data retained in AI processing?*DPAI-03Do you have agreements in place with third parties or subprocessors regarding the protection of customer data and use of AI?*DPAI-04Will institutional data be processed through a third party or subprocessor that also uses AI?DPAI-05Is AI processing limited to fully licensed commercial enterprise AI services?DPAI-06Will institutional data be used or processed by any shared AI services?Provide detailed response to the type of data needed for the AI service to function appropriately, the sources of the data, and whether any data shared with the AI service comes from data sources outside the institution.DPAI-07Do you have safeguards in place to protect institutional data and data privacy from unintended AI queries or processing?DPAI-08Do you provide choice to the user to opt out of AI use?End Table DataCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 9: Institution Evaluation
HECVAT(tm) Institution EvaluationVersion 4.1.5Instructions for Analysts1. Upon initial review, you can check the "Non-Negotiable" box by any question to compile a report of questions that may prohibit a full review.2. When evaluating an answer, a default importance level has been set. You can use the "Importance Override" dropdown to override the default and adjust the value of the question.3. For questions that are qualitative or for which you disagree with the preferred response, make a selection in the "Compliant Override" dropdown to adjust the question's impact on the score.4. Each worksheet shows a report for that section. See the "Analyst Report" sheet for a full report of all sections. 5. If you are evaluating a question that appears in an earlier section, the Importance and Compliant Override cannot be changed but additional notes can be added. For full instructions, please visit EDUCAUSE.edu/HECVATSolution Provider NameSolution Provider Contact NameSolution Provider Contact TitleSolution Provider Contact EmailSolution NameSolution DescriptionDate Prepared12/30/1899Cells A20 to A40 have intentionally been left blank.Report SectionsInclude in Score?Max ScoreScoreScore %Jump toCompany Information12000%Jump to Company InformationCOMPDocumentation19000%Jump to DocumentationDOCUAssessment of Third Parties19000%Jump to Assessment of Third PartiesTHRDChange Management115000%Jump to Change ManagementCHNGPolicies, Processes, and Procedures114500%Jump to Policies, Processes, and ProceduresPPPRAuthentication, Authorization, and Account Management125000%Jump to Authentication, Authorization, and Account ManagementAAAIData128000%Jump to DataDATAApplication/Service Security120000%Jump to Application/Service SecurityAPPLDatacenter100N/AJump to DatacenterDCTRFirewalls, IDS, IPS, and Networking114500%Jump to Firewalls, IDS, IPS, and NetworkingFIDPIncident Handling12500%Jump to Incident HandlingHFIHVulnerability Management18500%Jump to Vulnerability ManagementVULNConsulting Services113000%Jump to Consulting ServicesCONSHIPAA Compliance 132500%Jump toHIPAA Compliance HIPAPayment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)111500%Jump to Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)PCIDOn-Premises Data Solutions17500%Jump to On-Premises Data SolutionsOPEMIT Accessibility117000%Jump to IT AccessibilityITACAI (aggregated)140500%Jump to AI QuestionsPrivacy (aggregated)154000%Jump to Privacy ScorecardOverall Score3,24000%End Table DataHECVAT Analyst ReportInstitution AssessmentInstructions for Analysts1. Upon initial review, you can check the "Non-Negotiable" box by any question to compile a report of questions that may prohibit a full review.2. When evaluating an answer, a default importance level has been set. You can use the "Importance Override" dropdown to override the default and adjust the value of the question.3. For questions that are qualitative or for which you disagree with the preferred response, make a selection in the "Compliant Override" dropdown to adjust the question's impact on the score.4. Each worksheet shows a report for that section. See the "Analyst Report" sheet for a full report of all sections. 5. If you are evaluating a question that appears in an earlier section, the Importance and Compliant Override cannot be changed but additional notes can be added. For full instructions, please visit EDUCAUSE.edu/HECVATAnalyst NotesAnalysts: Use columns G and I to override the response compliance and importance level.IDQuestionAnswerAdditional InformationGuidance(Will reflect across applicable tabs)Compliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?General InformationBack to ScorecardGNRL-01Solution Provider NameNot scoredGNRL-02Solution NameNot scoredGNRL-03Solution DescriptionNot scoredGNRL-04Solution Provider Contact NameNot scoredGNRL-05Solution Provider Contact TitleNot scoredGNRL-06Solution Provider Contact EmailNot scoredGNRL-07Solution Provider Contact Phone NumberNot scoredGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersNot scoredGNRL-09Employee Work Locations (all)Not scoredCompany InformationBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?COMP-01Do you have a dedicated software and system development team(s) (e.g., customer support, implementation, product management, etc.)?*YesStandard Importance0COMP-02Describe your organization's business background and ownership structure, including all parent and subsidiary relationships.Include circumstances that may involve offshoring or multinational agreements.Not scored0COMP-03Have you operated without unplanned disruptions to this solution in the past 12 months?YesMinor Importance0COMP-04Do you have a dedicated information security staff or office?YesMinor Importance0COMP-05Use this area to share information about your environment that will assist those who are assessing your company's data security program.Share any details that would help information security analysts assess your solution.Not scored00Required QuestionsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?REQU-01Are you offering a cloud-based product?If you are only offering a service, or are offering a product that is not cloud-based, answer "no".Not scored0REQU-02Does your product or service have an interface?This includes any interface for end users and interfaces used by administrators at the institution.Not scored0REQU-03Are you providing consulting services?Not scored0REQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?Not scored0REQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?Answer "yes" if your solution handles personal health information (PHI), either directly or via a third party.Not scored0REQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?Answer yes if your solution handles PCI (credit card) information, either directly or via a third party.Not scored0REQU-07Does operating your solution require the institution to operate a physical or virtual appliance in their own environment or to provide inbound firewall exceptions to allow your employees to remotely administer systems in the institution's environment?Not scored0REQU-08Does your solution have access to personal or institutional data?This includes patient data, student data, employment data, human research data, financial data, etc.Not scored0DocumentationBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?DOCU-01Do you have a well-documented business continuity plan (BCP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*YesCritical Importance0DOCU-02Do you have a well-documented disaster recovery plan (DRP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*YesCritical Importance0DOCU-03Have you undergone a SSAE 18/SOC 2 audit?YesStandard Importance0DOCU-04Do you conform with a specific industry standard security framework (e.g., NIST Cybersecurity Framework, CIS Controls, ISO 27001, etc.)?YesStandard Importance0DOCU-05Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams, including a full description of the data flow for all components of the system?YesStandard Importance0DOCU-06Does your organization have a data privacy policy?YesStandard Importance0DOCU-07Do you have a documented, and currently implemented, employee onboarding and offboarding policy?YesStandard Importance0Assessment of Third PartiesBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?THRD-01Do you perform security assessments of third-party companies with which you share data (e.g., hosting providers, cloud services, PaaS, IaaS, SaaS)?*YesCritical Importance0THRD-02Do you have contractual language in place with third parties governing access to institutional data?*List each third party and why institutional data is shared with them. Format example: [Third Party Name] - ReasonYesCritical Importance0THRD-03Do the contracts in place with these third parties address liability in the event of a data breach?*YesCritical Importance0THRD-04Do you have an implemented third-party management strategy?*Robust answers from the solution provider improve the quality and efficiency of the security assessment process.YesCritical Importance0THRD-05Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your hardware supply chain (e.g., telecommunications equipment, export licensing, computing devices)?Make sure you address any national or regional regulations.YesStandard Importance0Change ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?CHNG-01Will the institution be notified of major changes to your environment that could impact the institution's security posture?*YesCritical Importance0CHNG-02Does the system support client customizations from one release to another?*Ensure that all relevant details pertaining to CHNG-06 are clearly stated in your response.YesCritical Importance0CHNG-03Do you have an implemented system configuration management process (e.g., secure "gold" images, etc.)?*YesCritical Importance0CHNG-04Do you have a documented change management process?YesStandard Importance0CHNG-05Does your change management process minimally include authorization, impact analysis, testing, and validation before moving changes to production?YesStandard Importance0CHNG-06Does your change management process verify that all required third-party libraries and dependencies are still supported with each major change?YesStandard Importance0CHNG-07Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, managing how critical patches are applied to all systems and applications?YesStandard Importance0CHNG-08Have you implemented policies and procedures that guide how security risks are mitigated until patches can be applied?YesStandard Importance0CHNG-09Do clients have the option to not participate in or postpone an upgrade to a new release?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-10Do you have a fully implemented solution support strategy that defines how many concurrent versions you support?List the current version you support and what percentage of customers are utilizing that version.YesMinor Importance0CHNG-11Do you have a release schedule for product updates?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-12Do you have a technology roadmap, for at least the next two years, for enhancements and bug fixes for the solution being assessed?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-13Can solution updates be completed without institutional involvement (i.e., technically or organizationally)?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-14Are upgrades or system changes installed during off-peak hours or in a manner that does not impact the customer?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-15Do procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-fact approval)?YesMinor Importance0CHNG-16Do you have a systems management and configuration strategy that encompasses servers, appliances, cloud services, applications, and mobile devices (company and employee owned)?YesMinor Importance0Policies, Processes, and ProceduresBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?PPPR-01Do you have a documented patch management process?*YesCritical Importance0PPPR-02Can your organization comply with institutional policies on privacy and data protection with regard to users of institutional systems, if required?*YesCritical Importance0PPPR-03Is your company subject to the institution's geographic region's laws and regulations?*State the country that governs and regulates your company.YesCritical Importance0PPPR-04Can you accommodate encryption requirements using open standards?YesStandard Importance0PPPR-05Do you have a documented systems development life cycle (SDLC)?YesStandard Importance0PPPR-06Do you perform background screenings or multi-state background checks on all employees prior to their first day of work?YesStandard Importance0PPPR-07Do you require new employees to fill out agreements and review policies?YesStandard Importance0PPPR-08Do you have a documented information security policy?YesStandard Importance0PPPR-09Are information security principles designed into the product lifecycle?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-10Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-11Do you have an information security awareness program?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-12Is security awareness training mandatory for all employees?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-13Do you have process and procedure(s) documented, and currently followed, that require a review and update of the access list(s) for privileged accounts?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-14Do you have documented, and currently implemented, internal audit processes and procedures?YesMinor Importance0PPPR-15Does your organization have physical security controls and policies in place?YesMinor Importance0Authentication, Authorization, and Account ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AAAI-01Does your solution support single sign-on (SSO) protocols for user and administrator authentication?*Answer "yes" only if user AND administrator authentication is supported. If partially supported, answer "no." Ensure you respond to any guidance in the Additional Information column.YesCritical Importance0AAAI-02For customers not using SSO, does your solution support local authentication protocols for user and administrator authentication?*YesCritical Importance0AAAI-03For customers not using SSO, can you enforce password/passphrase complexity requirements (provided by the institution)?*YesCritical Importance0AAAI-04For customers not using SSO, does the system have password complexity or length limitations and/or restrictions?*Answer "yes" if your solution has internal limits to password complexity (max length, certain special characters unsupported, etc.).NoCritical Importance0AAAI-05For customers not using SSO, do you have documented password/passphrase reset procedures that are currently implemented in the system and/or customer support?*YesCritical Importance0AAAI-06Does your organization participate in InCommon or another eduGAIN-affiliated trust federation?*YesCritical Importance0AAAI-07Are there any passwords/passphrases hard-coded into your systems or solutions?*NoCritical Importance0AAAI-08Are you storing any passwords in plaintext?*NoCritical Importance0AAAI-09Are audit logs available that include AT LEAST all of the following: login, logout, actions performed, and source IP address?*YesCritical Importance0AAAI-10Describe or provide a reference to the (a) system capability to log security/authorization changes, as well as user and administrator security events (i.e., physical or electronic), such as login failures, access denied, changes accepted; and (b) all requirements necessary to implement logging and monitoring on the system. Include (c) information about SIEM/log collector usage.*Ensure that all elements of AAAI-10 are clearly stated in your response.Not scored0AAAI-11Can you provide the institution documentation regarding the retention period for those logs, how logs are protected, and whether they are accessible to the customer (and if so, how)?*Ensure that all elements of AAAI-11 are clearly stated in your response.YesCritical Importance0AAAI-12For customers not using SSO, does your application support integration with other authentication and authorization systems?YesStandard Importance0AAAI-13Do you allow the customer to specify attribute mappings for any needed information beyond a user identifier? (e.g., Reference eduPerson, ePPA/ePPN/ePE)YesStandard Importance0AAAI-14For customers not using SSO, does your application support directory integration for user accounts?YesStandard Importance0AAAI-15Does your solution support any of the following web SSO standards: SAML2 (with redirect flow), OIDC, CAS, or other?An answer of "yes" should be well-supported in the Additional Information column, and all elements of interest should be sufficiently addressed.YesMinor Importance0AAAI-16Do you support differentiation between email address and user identifier?YesMinor Importance0AAAI-17For customers not using SSO, does your application and/or user frontend/portal support multifactor authentication (e.g., Duo, Google Authenticator, OTP, etc.)?YesMinor Importance0AAAI-18Does your application automatically lock the session or log out an account after a period of inactivity?YesMinor Importance0DataBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?DATA-01Will the institution's data be stored on any devices (database servers, file servers, SAN, NAS, etc.) configured with non-RFC 1918/4193 (i.e., publicly routable) IP addresses?*NoCritical Importance0DATA-02Is the transport of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., system-to-client)?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-03Is the storage of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., disk encryption, at-rest, files, and within a running database)?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-04Do all cryptographic modules in use in your solution conform to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS PUB 140-2 or 140-3)?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-05Will the institution's data be available within the system for a period of time at the completion of this contract?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-06Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained even through a provider acquisition or bankruptcy event?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-07Do backups containing the institution's data ever leave the institution's data zone either physically or via network routing?*NoCritical Importance0DATA-08Is media used for long-term retention of business data and archival purposes stored in a secure, environmentally protected area?*YesCritical Importance0DATA-09At the completion of this contract, will data be returned to the institution and/or deleted from all your systems and archives?Please specify if it will be returned, deleted, or both. YesStandard Importance0DATA-10Can the institution extract a full or partial backup of data?YesStandard Importance0DATA-11Do current backups include all operating system software, utilities, security software, application software, and data files necessary for recovery?YesStandard Importance0DATA-12Are you performing off-site backups (i.e., digitally moved off site)?YesStandard Importance0DATA-13Are physical backups taken off-site (i.e., physically moved off site)?YesStandard Importance0DATA-14Are data backups encrypted?YesMinor Importance0DATA-15Do you have a media handling process that is documented and currently implemented that meets established business needs and regulatory requirements, including end-of-life, repurposing, and data-sanitization procedures?YesStandard Importance0DATA-16Does the process described in DATA-15 adhere to DoD 5220.22-M and/or NIST SP 800-88 standards?YesStandard Importance0DATA-17Does your staff (or third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?NoStandard Importance0DATA-18Do you have a documented and currently implemented strategy for securing employee workstations when they work remotely (i.e., not in a trusted computing environment)?YesStandard Importance0DATA-19Does the environment provide for dedicated single-tenant capabilities? If not, describe how your solution or environment separates data from different customers (e.g., logically, physically, single tenancy, multi-tenancy).YesMinor Importance0DATA-20Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained by the institution?YesMinor Importance0DATA-21In the event of imminent bankruptcy, closing of business, or retirement of service, will you provide 90 days for customers to get their data out of the system and migrate applications?YesMinor Importance0DATA-22Are involatile backup copies made according to predefined schedules and securely stored and protected?Ensure that response addresses involatile storage and lists retention periods.YesMinor Importance0DATA-23Do you have a cryptographic key management process (generation, exchange, storage, safeguards, use, vetting, and replacement) that is documented and currently implemented, for all system components (e.g., database, system, web, etc.)?Summarize your cryptographic key management process.YesMinor Importance0Application/Service SecurityBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?APPL-01Are access controls for institutional accounts based on structured rules, such as role-based access control (RBAC), attribute-based access control (ABAC), or policy-based access control (PBAC)?*This includes end users, administrators, service accounts, etc. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.YesCritical Importance0APPL-02Are you using a web application firewall (WAF)?*YesCritical Importance0APPL-03Are only currently supported operating system(s), software, and libraries leveraged by the system(s)/application(s) that will have access to institution's data?*If the web application only works with a subset of modern supported browsers, please indicate that here.YesCritical Importance0APPL-04Does your application require access to location or GPS data?*NoCritical Importance0APPL-05Does your application provide separation of duties between security administration, system administration, and standard user functions?*YesCritical Importance0APPL-06Do you subject your code to static code analysis and/or static application security testing prior to release?*YesCritical Importance0APPL-07Do you have software testing processes (dynamic or static) that are established and followed?*YesCritical Importance0APPL-08Are access controls for staff within your organization based on structured rules, such as RBAC, ABAC, or PBAC?This includes system administrators and third-party personnel with access to the system. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.YesStandard Importance0APPL-09Does the system provide data input validation and error messages?YesStandard Importance0APPL-10Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your software supply chain (e.g., libraries, repositories, frameworks, etc.)?Include any in-house developed or contract development.YesStandard Importance0APPL-11Have your developers been trained in secure coding techniques?YesStandard Importance0APPL-12Was your application developed using secure coding techniques?YesStandard Importance0APPL-13If mobile, is the application available from a trusted source (e.g., App Store, Google Play Store)?Select N/A if there is no mobile version of your app.YesMinor Importance0APPL-14Do you have a fully implemented policy or procedure that details how your employees obtain administrator access to institutional instance of the application?YesMinor Importance0DatacenterBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?DCTR-01Select your hosting option.If you are using an option not listed, or a combination of options, select "Other." Your selection here will determine which questions below are required.Not scored0DCTR-02Is a SOC 2 Type 2 report available for the hosting environment?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-03Are you generally able to accommodate storing each institution's data within its geographic region?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-04Are the data centers staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week (i.e., 24 x 7 x 365)?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-05Are your servers separated from other companies via a physical barrier, such as a cage or hard walls?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-06Does a physical barrier fully enclose the physical space, preventing unauthorized physical contact with any of your devices?*YesCritical Importance0DCTR-07Are your primary and secondary data centers geographically diverse?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-08Is the service hosted in a high-availability environment?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-09Is redundant power available for all data centers where institutional data will reside?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-10Are redundant power strategies tested?*YesCritical Importance0DCTR-11Does the center where the data will reside have cooling and fire-suppression systems that are active and regularly tested?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-12Do you have Internet Service Provider (ISP) redundancy?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-13Does every data center where the institution's data will reside have multiple telephone company or network provider entrances to the facility?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-14Do you require multifactor authentication for all administrative accounts in your environment?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-15Are you using your cloud provider's available hardening tools or pre-hardened images?YesStandard Importance0DCTR-16Does your cloud solution provider have access to your encryption keys?NoStandard Importance0Firewalls, IDS, IPS, and NetworkingBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?FIDP-01Are you utilizing a stateful packet inspection (SPI) firewall?*YesCritical Importance0FIDP-02Do you have a documented policy for firewall change requests?*YesCritical Importance0FIDP-03Have you implemented an intrusion detection system (network-based)?*YesCritical Importance0FIDP-04Do you employ host-based intrusion detection?*YesCritical Importance0FIDP-05Are audit logs available for all changes to the network, firewall, IDS, and IPS systems?*YesCritical Importance0FIDP-06Is authority for firewall change approval documented? Please list approver names or titles in Additional Info.YesStandard Importance0FIDP-07Have you implemented an intrusion prevention system (network-based)?YesStandard Importance0FIDP-08Do you employ host-based intrusion prevention?YesStandard Importance0FIDP-09Are you employing any next-generation persistent threat (NGPT) monitoring?YesStandard Importance0FIDP-10Is intrusion monitoring performed internally or by a third-party service?In addition to stating your intrusion monitoring strategy, provide a brief summary of its implementation.Not scored0FIDP-11Do you monitor for intrusions on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?YesMinor Importance0Incident HandlingBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?HFIH-01Do you have a formal incident response plan?YesStandard Importance0HFIH-02Do you either have an internal incident response team or retain an external team?YesMinor Importance0HFIH-03Do you have the capability to respond to incidents on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?YesMinor Importance0HFIH-04Do you carry cyber-risk insurance to protect against unforeseen service outages, data that is lost or stolen, and security incidents?YesMinor Importance0Vulnerability ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?VULN-01Are your systems and applications scanned with an authenticated user account for vulnerabilities (that are remediated) prior to new releases?*YesCritical Importance0VULN-02Will you provide results of application and system vulnerability scans to the institution?*YesCritical Importance0VULN-03Will you allow the institution to perform its own vulnerability testing and/or scanning of your systems and/or application, provided that testing is performed at a mutually agreed upon time and date?*YesCritical Importance0VULN-04Have your systems and applications had a third-party security assessment completed in the last year?YesStandard Importance0VULN-05Do you regularly scan for common web application security vulnerabilities (e.g., SQL injection, XSS, XSRF, etc.)?Ensure that all elements of VULN-05 are clearly stated in your response.YesStandard Importance0VULN-06Are your systems and applications regularly scanned externally for vulnerabilities?YesMinor Importance0IT AccessibilityBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?ITAC-01Solution Provider Accessibility Contact NameNot scored0ITAC-02Solution Provider Accessibility Contact TitleNot scored0ITAC-03Solution Provider Accessibility Contact EmailNot scored0ITAC-04Solution Provider Accessibility Contact Phone NumberNot scored0ITAC-05Web Link to Accessibility Statement or VPATVPAT can also be added as an attachmentNot scored0ITAC-06Has a VPAT or ACR been created or updated for the solution and version under consideration within the past 12 months?*If your answer is "I do not know," select "no." If the VPAT/ACR is for an older version of the product or has not been updated, its information does not accurately reflect the accessibility of the product under consideration and the response should be "no." Provide a link or attachment to the most recent VPAT/ACR.YesCritical Importance0ITAC-07Will your company agree to meet your stated accessibility standard or WCAG 2.1 AA as part of your contractual agreement for the solution?*YesCritical Importance0ITAC-08Does the solution substantially conform to WCAG 2.1 AA?*Solutions "substantially conform" if they entirely meet WCAG 2.1 AA or if almost all user and administrator features conform. Documentation about limitations and/or workarounds should be provided where WCAG conformance is not presently achieved. If the solution substantially conforms to a newer standard such as WCAG 2.2 AA, answer "yes."YesCritical Importance0ITAC-09Do you have a documented and implemented process for reporting and tracking accessibility issues?*Reporting and fixing accessibility issues is critical to a mature process. If the process for this question is merely a "feature request" and tracker, the answer to this question should be "no." YesCritical Importance0ITAC-10Do you have documentation to support the accessibility features of your solution?If specific configurations, settings, themes, author guides, or instructions are needed to ensure accessibility, are instructions on how to do so provided for administrators and end users?YesStandard Importance0ITAC-11Has a third-party expert conducted an audit of the most recent version of your solution?Audit results, including VPAT/ACRs, are voluntary reports often generated by the creator of the product. Audits conducted and reports generated by expert third parties give greater confidence to customers.YesStandard Importance0ITAC-12Do you have a documented and implemented process for verifying accessibility conformance?YesStandard Importance0ITAC-13Have you adopted a technical or legal standard of conformance for the solution?Various federal and state governments in the United States and around the world have mandated accessibility technical requirements that should be considered and may be required when selling solutions to institutions in these jurisdictions.YesStandard Importance0ITAC-14Can you provide a current, detailed accessibility roadmap with delivery timelines?A detailed accessibility roadmap should reference improvements and progress on known accessibility issues as appropriate but does not necessarily need to list unreleased product features.YesStandard Importance0ITAC-15Do you expect your staff to maintain a current skill set in IT accessibility?How do you ensure that your professional staff keeps current with digital accessibility laws and best practices? Is your staff able to evaluate and test this product with assistive technologies such as a screen reader or alternative input devices? Examples of staff certification may include IAAP certifications <https://www.accessibilityassociation.org/s/professional-certifications> or §508 Trusted Tester <https://www.dhs.gov/trusted-tester>.YesStandard Importance0ITAC-16Do you have documented processes and procedures for implementing accessibility into your development lifecycle?Describe where accessibility falls in the development and product lifecycle. Is it at the beginning of your project development or after the product is otherwise complete before launch? Do you incorporate accessibility in your development methods, such as Agile scrums? Does your customer-facing accessibility reporting match your development processes (i.e., Agile methods are best represented using a roadmap and timeline; revised VPAT/ACRs provide a snapshot in time of a given release)?YesStandard Importance0ITAC-17Can all functions of the application or service be performed using only the keyboard?YesStandard Importance0ITAC-18Does your product rely on activating a special "accessibility mode," a "lite version," or using an alternate interface (including "overlay" or AI-based alternates) for accessibility purposes?Third-party overlays or add-ons are not sufficient for products to conform with accessibility standards. If there is an accessibility mode, does it address a specific accessibility need? Are plans in place to remove the accessible version, and are these distinctions delineated on your roadmap and timeline?NoStandard Importance0Consulting ServicesBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?CONS-01Will the consultant require access to the institution's network resources?*NoCritical Importance0CONS-02Has the consultant received training on (sensitive, HIPAA, PCI, etc.) data handling?*YesCritical Importance0CONS-03Is the data encrypted (at rest) while in the consultant's possession?*YesCritical Importance0CONS-04Can access be restricted based on source IP address?*YesCritical Importance0CONS-05Will the consulting take place on-premises?NoStandard Importance0CONS-06Will the consultant require access to hardware in the institution's data centers?NoStandard Importance0CONS-07Will the consultant require an account within the institution's domain (@*.edu)?NoStandard Importance0CONS-08Will any data be transferred to the consultant's possession?NoStandard Importance0CONS-09Will the consultant need remote access to the institution's network or systems?NoStandard Importance0HIPAA Compliance Back to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?HIPA-01Do your workforce members receive regular training related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules and the HITECH Act?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical Importance0HIPA-02Have you identified areas of risk?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical Importance0HIPA-03Have the relevant policies/plans been tested?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical Importance0HIPA-04Have you entered into a Business Associate Agreements with all subcontractors who may have access to protected health information (PHI)?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical Importance0HIPA-05Do you monitor or receive information regarding changes in HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-06Has your organization designated HIPAA Privacy and Security officers as required by the rules?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-07Do you comply with the requirements of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-08Have you conducted a risk analysis as required under the HIPAA Security Rule?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-09Have you taken actions to mitigate the identified risks?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-10Does your application require user and system administrator password changes at a frequency no greater than 90 days?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-11Does your application require users to set their own password after an administrator reset or on first use of the account?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-12Does your application lock out an account after a number of failed login attempts?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-13Does your application automatically lock or log-out an account after a period of inactivity?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-14Are passwords visible in plain text, whether when stored or entered, including service level accounts (i.e., database accounts, etc.)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.NoStandard Importance0HIPA-15If the application is institution-hosted, can all service level and administrative account passwords be changed by the institution?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-16Does your application provide the ability to define user access levels?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-17Does your application support varying levels of access to administrative tasks defined individually per user?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-18Does your application support varying levels of access to records based on user ID?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.NoStandard Importance0HIPA-19Is there a limit to the number of groups to which a user can be assigned?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-20Do accounts used for solution provider-supplied remote support abide by the same authentication policies and access logging as the rest of the system?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-21Does the application log record access including specific user, date/time of access, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-22Does the application log administrative activity, such as user account access changes and password changes, including specific user, date/time of changes, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-23Do you retain logs for at least as long as required by HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-24Can the application logs be archived?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-25Can the application logs be saved externally?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-26Do you have a disaster recovery plan and emergency mode operation plan?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-27Can you provide a HIPAA compliance attestation document?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-28Are you willing to enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard Importance0HIPA-29Do your data backup and retention policies and practices meet HIPAA requirements?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesMinor Importance0Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)Back to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?PCID-01Do you have a current, executed within the past year, Attestation of Compliance (AoC) or Report on Compliance (RoC)?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesCritical Importance0PCID-02Is the application listed as an approved Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS) application?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNoCritical Importance0PCID-03Does the system or solutions use a third party to collect, store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNoCritical Importance0PCID-04Do your systems or solutions store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard Importance0PCID-05Are you compliant with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard Importance0PCID-06Are you classified as a service provider?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard Importance0PCID-07Are you on the list of Visa approved service providers?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard Importance0PCID-08Are you classified as a merchant? If so, what level (1, 2, 3, 4)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard Importance0PCID-09Describe the architecture employed by the system to verify and authorize credit card transactions.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scored0PCID-10What payment processors/gateways does the system support?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scored0PCID-11Can the application be installed in a PCI DSS-compliant manner?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesMinor Importance0PCID-12Include documentation describing the system's abilities to comply with the PCI DSS and any features or capabilities of the system that must be added or changed in order to operate in compliance with the standards.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scored0On-Premises Data SolutionsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?OPEM-01Do you support role-based access control (RBAC) for system administrators?YesStandard Importance0OPEM-02Can your employees access customer systems remotely?NoStandard Importance0OPEM-03Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams including a full description of the data communications architecture for all components of the system?YesStandard Importance0OPEM-04Do you require remote management of the system?NoStandard Importance0OPEM-05If you answered "yes" to OPEM-04, are your remote actions and changes logged or otherwise visible to the campus?YesStandard Importance0OPEM-06If you maintain remote access to the system, will you handle data in a FERPA-compliant manner?YesStandard Importance0OPEM-07Do you support campus status monitoring through SNMPv3 or other means?YesStandard Importance0OPEM-08Describe or provide a reference to any other safeguards used to monitor for malicious activity.Please detail your monitoring strategyNot scored0OPEM-09Describe how long your organization has conducted business in this area.Include the number of years and in what capacity.Not scored0OPEM-10Do you have existing higher education customers?YesMinor Importance0AI Qualifying QuestionsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AIQU-01Does your solution leverage machine learning (ML) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?Answer "yes" even if you do not create your own machine learning solutions, and answer the questions as they apply to your contractual relationship with the third party you utilize.Not scored0AIQU-02Does your solution leverage a large language model (LLM) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?Answer "yes" even if you do not train your own LLM models, and answer the questions as they apply to your contractual relationship with the third party you utilize.Not scored0General AI QuestionsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AIGN-01Does your solution have an AI risk model when developing or implementing your solution's AI model?*Examples include NIST AI RMF, OWASP Top 10, RAFT, and MITRE ATLAS.YesCritical Importance0AIGN-02Can your solution's AI features be disabled by tenant and/or user?*YesCritical Importance0AIGN-03Have your staff completed responsible AI training?*YesCritical Importance0AIGN-04Please describe the capabilities of your solution's AI features.Describe capabilities such as content (text, image, audio, speech, video, or code) generation, visual interpretation, and predictive analytics. This encompasses all AI implementations, including third-party AI features. Clarify use cases or limits of the model.Not scored0AIGN-05Does your solution support business rules to protect sensitive data from being ingested by the AI model?YesStandard Importance0AI PolicyBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AIPL-01Are your AI developer's policies, processes, procedures, and practices across the organization related to the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks conspicuously posted, unambiguous, and implemented effectively?*YesCritical Importance0AIPL-02Have you identified and measured AI risks?*YesCritical Importance0AIPL-03In the event of an incident, can your solution's AI features be disabled in a timely manner?*YesCritical Importance0AIPL-04If disabled because of an incident, can your solution's AI features be re-enabled in a timely manner?*YesCritical Importance0AIPL-05Do you have documented technical and procedural processes to address potential negative impacts of AI as described by the AI Risk Management Framework (RMF)?Responsible AI development per NIST AI RMF, page 25.YesMinor Importance0AI Data SecurityBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AISC-01If sensitive data is introduced to your solution's AI model, can the data be removed from the AI model by request?*Please answer based on whether your AI model supports the removal or unlearning of sensitive data, whether it is introduced intentionally or unintentionally. Consider whether data can be traced and deleted from training sets, vector stores, memory, or other components of the AI system. This includes data removal in compliance with privacy regulations and customer requests.YesCritical Importance0AISC-02Is user input data used to influence your solution's AI model?*Please answer based on whether your solution uses user input data (e.g., prompts, uploads, queries) to fine-tune, train, or otherwise influence the behavior of your AI model. Consider any use of user data for model improvement, personalization, or aggregated learning.NoCritical Importance0AISC-03Do you provide logging for your solution's AI feature(s) that includes user, date, and action taken?*Please answer based on whether your AI features generate audit logs that record user identity, timestamp, and actions taken. Include log retention, immutability, access for administrators or auditors, and how logs support compliance and incident response.YesCritical Importance0AISC-04Please describe how you validate user inputs.Please describe how your solution validates user inputs, including detection of anomalies, malicious inputs, and sensitive data. Indicate where validation occurs and how it supports security and compliance.Not scored0AISC-05Do you plan for and mitigate supply-chain risk related to your AI features?YesStandard Importance0AI Machine LearningBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AIML-01Do you separate ML training data from your ML solution data?*Please answer based on whether training data is kept separate from production data to protect institutional information. Include how organizational data is segregated, anonymized, or excluded from training, and state whether institutions can opt out of data use for model improvement.YesCritical Importance0AIML-02Do you authenticate and verify your ML model's feedback?*YesCritical Importance0AIML-03Is your ML training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?YesStandard Importance0AIML-04Is your ML training data monitored and audited?YesStandard Importance0AIML-05Have you limited access to your ML training data to only staff with an explicit business need?YesMinor Importance0AIML-06Have you implemented adversarial training or other model defense mechanisms to protect your ML-related features?YesMinor Importance0AIML-07Do you make your ML model transparent through documentation and log inputs and outputs?YesMinor Importance0AIML-08Do you watermark your ML training data?YesMinor Importance0AI Large Language Model (LLM)Back to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?AILM-01Do you limit your solution's LLM privileges by default?*YesCritical Importance0AILM-02Is your LLM training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?*YesCritical Importance0AILM-03Do any actions taken by your solution's LLM features or plugins require human intervention?*YesCritical Importance0AILM-04Do you limit multiple LLM model plugins being called as part of a single input?*YesCritical Importance0AILM-05Do you limit your solution's LLM resource use per request, per step, and per action?YesStandard Importance0AILM-06Do you leverage LLM model tuning or other model validation mechanisms?YesStandard Importance0Copyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 10: High-Risk Evaluation
HECVAT Institution Evaluation - High RiskVersion 4.1.5Instructions for High-Risk Scorecard1. The scorecard below reflects those questions marked as "Critical Importance" or those where the "Non-Negotiable" box was checked. 2. Use these condensed, aggregated views to review those questions that pose the highest risk. 3. Changes cannot be made in this sheet. Please make changes in the appropriate "Evaluation" tab.4. For instructions on how to do a "HECVAT Lite" evaluation, please visit educause.edu/HECVAT. Solution Provider NameSolution Provider Contact NameSolution Provider Contact TitleSolution Provider Contact EmailSolution NameSolution DescriptionDate Prepared12/30/1899There are cells within this worksheet are auto populated from the HECVAT - Full | Vendor Response worksheet and drop down lists. Report SectionsQuestion CountMax ScoreScoreScore %Non-Negotiable000N/ACritical Importance/Lite Score871,70000%End Table DataCritical Importance Questions (Lite Review Questions)Non-Negotiable QuestionsCodeQuestionAnswerAdditional InformationAnalyst NotesCodeQuestionAnswerAdditional InformationAnalyst Notes1DOCU-01Do you have a well-documented business continuity plan (BCP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*1#NAME?2DOCU-02Do you have a well-documented disaster recovery plan (DRP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*#NAME?3ITAC-06Has a VPAT or ACR been created or updated for the solution and version under consideration within the past 12 months?*#NAME?4ITAC-07Will your company agree to meet your stated accessibility standard or WCAG 2.1 AA as part of your contractual agreement for the solution?*#NAME?5ITAC-08Does the solution substantially conform to WCAG 2.1 AA?*#NAME?6ITAC-09Do you have a documented and implemented process for reporting and tracking accessibility issues?*#NAME?7THRD-02Do you have contractual language in place with third parties governing access to institutional data?*#NAME?8THRD-01Do you perform security assessments of third-party companies with which you share data (e.g., hosting providers, cloud services, PaaS, IaaS, SaaS)?*#NAME?9THRD-03Do the contracts in place with these third parties address liability in the event of a data breach?*#NAME?10THRD-04Do you have an implemented third-party management strategy?*#NAME?11CONS-01Will the consultant require access to the institution's network resources?*#NAME?12CONS-02Has the consultant received training on (sensitive, HIPAA, PCI, etc.) data handling?*#NAME?13CONS-03Is the data encrypted (at rest) while in the consultant's possession?*#NAME?14CONS-04Can access be restricted based on source IP address?*#NAME?15APPL-01Are access controls for institutional accounts based on structured rules, such as role-based access control (RBAC), attribute-based access control (ABAC), or policy-based access control (PBAC)?*#NAME?16APPL-02Are you using a web application firewall (WAF)?*#NAME?17APPL-03Are only currently supported operating system(s), software, and libraries leveraged by the system(s)/application(s) that will have access to institution's data?*#NAME?18APPL-04Does your application require access to location or GPS data?*#NAME?19APPL-05Does your application provide separation of duties between security administration, system administration, and standard user functions?*#NAME?20APPL-06Do you subject your code to static code analysis and/or static application security testing prior to release?*#NAME?21APPL-07Do you have software testing processes (dynamic or static) that are established and followed?*#NAME?22AAAI-01Does your solution support single sign-on (SSO) protocols for user and administrator authentication?*#NAME?23AAAI-02For customers not using SSO, does your solution support local authentication protocols for user and administrator authentication?*#NAME?24AAAI-03For customers not using SSO, can you enforce password/passphrase complexity requirements (provided by the institution)?*#NAME?25AAAI-04For customers not using SSO, does the system have password complexity or length limitations and/or restrictions?*#NAME?26AAAI-05For customers not using SSO, do you have documented password/passphrase reset procedures that are currently implemented in the system and/or customer support?*#NAME?27AAAI-06Does your organization participate in InCommon or another eduGAIN-affiliated trust federation?*#NAME?28AAAI-07Are there any passwords/passphrases hard-coded into your systems or solutions?*#NAME?29AAAI-08Are you storing any passwords in plaintext?*#NAME?30AAAI-09Are audit logs available that include AT LEAST all of the following: login, logout, actions performed, and source IP address?*#NAME?31AAAI-11Can you provide the institution documentation regarding the retention period for those logs, how logs are protected, and whether they are accessible to the customer (and if so, how)?*#NAME?32CHNG-01Will the institution be notified of major changes to your environment that could impact the institution's security posture?*#NAME?33CHNG-02Does the system support client customizations from one release to another?*#NAME?34CHNG-03Do you have an implemented system configuration management process (e.g., secure "gold" images, etc.)?*#NAME?35DATA-01Will the institution's data be stored on any devices (database servers, file servers, SAN, NAS, etc.) configured with non-RFC 1918/4193 (i.e., publicly routable) IP addresses?*#NAME?36DATA-02Is the transport of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., system-to-client)?*#NAME?37DATA-03Is the storage of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., disk encryption, at-rest, files, and within a running database)?*#NAME?38DATA-04Do all cryptographic modules in use in your solution conform to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS PUB 140-2 or 140-3)?*#NAME?39DATA-05Will the institution's data be available within the system for a period of time at the completion of this contract?*#NAME?40DATA-06Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained even through a provider acquisition or bankruptcy event?*#NAME?41DATA-07Do backups containing the institution's data ever leave the institution's data zone either physically or via network routing?*#NAME?42DATA-08Is media used for long-term retention of business data and archival purposes stored in a secure, environmentally protected area?*#NAME?43DCTR-06Does a physical barrier fully enclose the physical space, preventing unauthorized physical contact with any of your devices?*#NAME?44DCTR-10Are redundant power strategies tested?*#NAME?45FIDP-01Are you utilizing a stateful packet inspection (SPI) firewall?*#NAME?46FIDP-02Do you have a documented policy for firewall change requests?*#NAME?47FIDP-03Have you implemented an intrusion detection system (network-based)?*#NAME?48FIDP-04Do you employ host-based intrusion detection?*#NAME?49FIDP-05Are audit logs available for all changes to the network, firewall, IDS, and IPS systems?*#NAME?50PPPR-01Do you have a documented patch management process?*#NAME?51PPPR-02Can your organization comply with institutional policies on privacy and data protection with regard to users of institutional systems, if required?*#NAME?52PPPR-03Is your company subject to the institution's geographic region's laws and regulations?*#NAME?53VULN-01Are your systems and applications scanned with an authenticated user account for vulnerabilities (that are remediated) prior to new releases?*#NAME?54VULN-02Will you provide results of application and system vulnerability scans to the institution?*#NAME?55VULN-03Will you allow the institution to perform its own vulnerability testing and/or scanning of your systems and/or application, provided that testing is performed at a mutually agreed upon time and date?*#NAME?56HIPA-01Do your workforce members receive regular training related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules and the HITECH Act?*#NAME?57HIPA-02Have you identified areas of risk?*#NAME?58HIPA-03Have the relevant policies/plans been tested?*#NAME?59HIPA-04Have you entered into a Business Associate Agreements with all subcontractors who may have access to protected health information (PHI)?*#NAME?60PCID-01Do you have a current, executed within the past year, Attestation of Compliance (AoC) or Report on Compliance (RoC)?*#NAME?61PCID-02Is the application listed as an approved Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS) application?*#NAME?62PCID-03Does the system or solutions use a third party to collect, store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?*#NAME?63PCOM-01Have you had a personal data breach in the past three years that involved reporting to a governmental agency, notice to individuals (including voluntary notice), or notice to another organization or institution?*#NAME?64PTHP-01Do you have contractual agreements with third parties that require them to maintain standards and to comply with all regulatory requirements?*#NAME?65PDAT-01Do you collect, process, or store demographic information?*#NAME?66PDAT-02Do you capture or create genetic, biometric, or behaviometric information (e.g., facial recognition or fingerprints)?*#NAME?67PDAT-03Do you combine institutional data (including "de-identified," "anonymized," or otherwise masked data) with personal data from any other sources?*#NAME?68PRPO-06Do you have a privacy awareness/training program?*#NAME?69PRPO-12Do you share any institutional data with law enforcement without a valid warrant or subpoena?*#NAME?70DPAI-02Is any institutional data retained in AI processing?*#NAME?71DPAI-03Do you have agreements in place with third parties or subprocessors regarding the protection of customer data and use of AI?*#NAME?72AIGN-01Does your solution have an AI risk model when developing or implementing your solution's AI model?*#NAME?73AIGN-02Can your solution's AI features be disabled by tenant and/or user?*#NAME?74AIGN-03Have your staff completed responsible AI training?*#NAME?75AIPL-01Are your AI developer's policies, processes, procedures, and practices across the organization related to the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks conspicuously posted, unambiguous, and implemented effectively?*#NAME?76AIPL-02Have you identified and measured AI risks?*#NAME?77AIPL-03In the event of an incident, can your solution's AI features be disabled in a timely manner?*#NAME?78AIPL-04If disabled because of an incident, can your solution's AI features be re-enabled in a timely manner?*#NAME?79AISC-01If sensitive data is introduced to your solution's AI model, can the data be removed from the AI model by request?*#NAME?80AISC-02Is user input data used to influence your solution's AI model?*#NAME?81AISC-03Do you provide logging for your solution's AI feature(s) that includes user, date, and action taken?*#NAME?82AIML-01Do you separate ML training data from your ML solution data?*#NAME?83AIML-02Do you authenticate and verify your ML model's feedback?*#NAME?84AILM-01Do you limit your solution's LLM privileges by default?*#NAME?85AILM-02Is your LLM training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?*#NAME?86AILM-03Do any actions taken by your solution's LLM features or plugins require human intervention?*#NAME?87AILM-04Do you limit multiple LLM model plugins being called as part of a single input?*#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?#NAME?End Table DataEnd of worksheet End of worksheet 
Sheet 11: Privacy Analyst Evaluation
HECVAT Institution Evaluation - PrivacyVersion 4.1.5Instructions for Analysts1. Upon initial review, you can check the "Non-Negotiable" box by any question to compile a report of questions that may prohibit a full review.2. When evaluating an answer, a default importance level has been set. You can use the "Importance Override" dropdown to override the default and adjust the value of the question.3. For questions that are qualitative or for which you disagree with the preferred response, make a selection in the "Compliant Override" dropdown to adjust the question's impact on the score.4. Each worksheet shows a report for that section. See the "Analyst Report" sheet for a full report of all sections. 5. If you are evaluating a question that appears in an earlier section, the Importance and Compliant Override cannot be changed but additional notes can be added. For full instructions, please visit EDUCAUSE.edu/HECVATSolution Provider NameSolution Provider Contact NameSolution Provider Contact TitleSolution Provider Contact EmailSolution NameSolution DescriptionDate Prepared12/30/1899Cells A20 to A40 have intentionally been left blank.Report SectionsInclude in Score?Max ScoreScoreScore %Jump toGeneral PrivacyN/AJump to General PrivacyPRGNPrivacy-Specific Company DetailsTRUE3000%Jump to Privacy-Specific Company DetailsPCOMPrivacy-Specific DocumentationTRUE1000%Jump to Privacy-Specific DocumentationPDOCPrivacy of Third PartiesTRUE2500%Jump to Privacy of Third PartiesPTHPPrivacy Change ManagementTRUE1500%Jump to Privacy Change ManagementPCHGPrivacy of Sensitive DataTRUE8000%Jump to Privacy of Sensitive DataPDATPrivacy Policies and ProceduresTRUE10000%Jump to Privacy Policies and ProceduresPRPOInternational PrivacyTRUE5000%Jump to International PrivacyINTLData PrivacyTRUE15000%Jump to Data PrivacyDRPVPrivacy and AITRUE8000%Jump to Privacy and AIDPAIPrivacy Score54000%End Table DataHECVAT Analyst Report - PrivacyInstitution AssessmentInstructions for Analysts1. Upon initial review, you can check the "Non-Negotiable" box by any question to compile a report of questions that may prohibit a full review.2. When evaluating an answer, a default importance level has been set. You can use the "Importance Override" dropdown to override the default and adjust the value of the question.3. For questions that are qualitative or for which you disagree with the preferred response, make a selection in the "Compliant Override" dropdown to adjust the question's impact on the score.4. Each worksheet shows a report for that section. See the "Analyst Report" sheet for a full report of all sections. 5. If you are evaluating a question that appears in an earlier section, the Importance and Compliant Override cannot be changed but additional notes can be added. For full instructions, please visit EDUCAUSE.edu/HECVATAnalyst NotesAnalysts: Use columns G and I to override the response compliance and importance level.IDQuestionVendor AnswerAdditional InformationGuidance(Will reflect across applicable tabs)Compliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?General PrivacyBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePRGN-01Does your solution process FERPA-related data?FERPA-related data includes any data maintained by (or on behalf of) the institution that is directly related to an identifiable student.Not scored0PRGN-02Does your solution process GDPR-related or PIPL-related data?GDPR data includes any data related to an identified or identifiable natural person physically located in the European Economic Area (EEA).
PIPL-related data includes any personal data related to an identified or identifiable person located in the People's Republic of China (PRC)Not scored0PRGN-03Does your solution process personal data regulated by state law(s) (e.g., CCPA)?Not scored0PRGN-04Does your solution process user-provided data that may contain regulated information?Not scored0PRGN-05Web Link to Product/Service Privacy NoticeIf multiple notices are implicated, provide all that apply. If any other documents are incorporated by reference, provide them as well.Not scored0Privacy-Specific Company DetailsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePCOM-01Have you had a personal data breach in the past three years that involved reporting to a governmental agency, notice to individuals (including voluntary notice), or notice to another organization or institution?*NoCritical Importance0PCOM-02Use this area to share information about your privacy practices that will assist those who are assessing your company data privacy program.*Share any additional details that would help data privacy analysts assess your solution.Not scored0PCOM-03Have you had any violations of your internal privacy policies or violations of applicable privacy law in the past 36 months?NoMinor Importance0PCOM-04Do you have a dedicated data privacy staff or office?This can include another office, such as information security, dedicated to privacy protection.YesMinor Importance0Privacy-Specific DocumentationBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePDOC-01If you have completed a SOC 2 audit, does it include the Privacy Trust Service Principle?SOC 2 Type II audits can be conducted for any or all of five trust principles (confidentiality, integrity, availability, security, and privacy). Answer "yes" if your audit included the privacy principle.Not scored0PDOC-02Do you conform with a specific industry-standard privacy framework (e.g., NIST Privacy Framework, GDPR, ISO 27701)?Standard privacy frameworks help organizations enhance data protection, mitigate privacy risks, and demonstrate compliance with appropriate industry and regulatory standards. This is particularly important when providing services in different jurisdictions.Not scored0PDOC-03Does your employee onboarding and offboarding policy include training of employees on information security and data privacy?YesStandard Importance0Privacy of Third PartiesBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePTHP-01Do you have contractual agreements with third parties that require them to maintain standards and to comply with all regulatory requirements?*Inclusion of language in contractual agreements ensures third parties are aware of and have agreed to their obligations to maintain standards and comply with all regulatory requirements in regards to protection of personal data they handle on behalf of your organization.YesCritical Importance0PTHP-02Do you perform privacy impact assessments of third parties that collect, process, or have access to personal data to ensure they meet industry and regulatory standards and to mitigate harmful, unethical, or discriminatory impacts on data subjects?Privacy impact assessments ensure that third-party collection, processing, or access to personal data aligns with and supports your organization's own efforts and commitments to clients. This is particularly important when a specific third party operates from or is subject to a jurisdiction different from that of your organization.YesMinor Importance0Privacy Change ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePCHG-01Does your change management process include privacy review and approval?The change management process minimizes disruption and maximizes benefits and should contain a privacy review process.YesStandard Importance0PCHG-02Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, guiding how privacy risks are mitigated until they can be resolved?Policy and procedure should include specific steps to take in the process of mitigating privacy risks.YesMinor Importance0Privacy of Sensitive DataBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePDAT-01Do you collect, process, or store demographic information?*Demographic information is generally defined as the statistical characteristics of a population used to study and understand certain aspects of that population. It can include characteristics such as age, gender, ethnicity, education, religion, geolocation, and occupation. If the information being collected, processed, or stored falls under a particular regulation (or law), check that regulation for a specific definition of demographic information.NoCritical Importance0PDAT-02Do you capture or create genetic, biometric, or behaviometric information (e.g., facial recognition or fingerprints)?*Genetic information would include information about genetic tests, genetic tests of family members, actual manifestations of diseases, and family medical records. Biometric information includes elements such as facial recognition, fingerprints, and voice recognition.
Behaviometric information is behavioral information collected and analyzed in order to understand human behavior. The exact elements collected may depend on the requirements of an applicable regulation or law.NoCritical Importance0PDAT-03Do you combine institutional data (including "de-identified," "anonymized," or otherwise masked data) with personal data from any other sources?*Institutional data is created, collected, maintained, transmitted, or stored by or for a college or university to conduct operations. Many institutions have their own specific definitions. Institutional data would include data such as financial information, student education records, faculty/staff/alumni data, research data, and data collected for government reporting purposes.NoCritical Importance0PDAT-04Is institutional data coming into or going out of the United States at any point during collection, processing, storage, or archiving?Given the vast number of privacy regulations and laws throughout the world, it is important to know when, where, why, and how institutional data is being shared outside the United States. This information is necessary to ensure compliance and to protect the institutional data.NoMinor Importance0PDAT-05Do you capture device information (e.g., IP address, MAC address)?Device information can be captured for a variety of reasons, from analytics to marketing to network management and security. It is important to know the details in order to be clear on the privacy implications.NoMinor Importance0PDAT-06Does any part of this service/project involve a web/app tracking component (e.g., use of web-tracking pixels, cookies)?Web tracking can be used to identify users via their IP address, login information, browser information, etc.NoMinor Importance0PDAT-07Does your staff (or a third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?Accessing institutional data may be necessary for legitimate business purposes.NoMinor Importance0PDAT-08Will you handle personal data in a manner compliant with all relevant laws, regulations, and applicable institution policies?Not scored0Privacy Policies and ProceduresBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePRPO-01Do you have a documented privacy management process?YesMinor Importance0PRPO-02Are privacy principles designed into the product lifecycle (i.e., privacy-by-design)?The question is assessing your compliance with Privacy by Design (PbD) principles. This concept, embedded in regulations such as GDPR (Article 25) and other global privacy laws, requires that privacy is not an afterthought-it must be part of the design and architecture of systems and processes from the outset.YesMinor Importance0PRPO-03Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?YesStandard Importance0PRPO-04Will you comply with the institution's policies regarding user privacy and data protection?These policies may include specific user consent practices, data classification standards, and handling of sensitive information.YesMinor Importance0PRPO-05Is your company subject to the laws and regulations of the institution's geographic region?Indicates whether your organization is legally bound by state, federal, or local laws where the institution operates.YesMinor Importance0PRPO-06Do you have a privacy awareness/training program?*Privacy awareness/training refers to the ongoing education provided to individuals who handle sensitive data to ensure they understand privacy obligations, data protection principles, and regulatory requirements (e.g., FERPA, HIPAA, GDPR).YesCritical Importance0PRPO-07Is privacy awareness training mandatory for all employees?YesMinor Importance0PRPO-08Is AI privacy and ethics awareness/training required for all employees who work with AI?YesMinor Importance0PRPO-09Do you have any decision-making processes that are completely automated (i.e., there is no human involvement)?Examples of such automated decisions could include automatically denying or approving user access requests, flagging or blocking transactions based on risk scores, or AI-driven decisions that affect user outcomes (e.g., eligibility, grading, pricing).NoMinor Importance0PRPO-10Do you have a documented process for managing automated processing, including validations, monitoring, and data subject requests?YesMinor Importance0PRPO-11Do you have a documented policy for sharing information with law enforcement?YesMinor Importance0PRPO-12Do you share any institutional data with law enforcement without a valid warrant or subpoena?*NoCritical Importance0PRPO-13Does your incident response team include a privacy analyst/officer?Provide an overview of your incident response team membership and its charge, highlighting the privacy analyst/officer.YesMinor Importance0International PrivacyBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideINTL-01Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in the European Economic Area (EEA)?See GDPR Chapter 1, Art. 4, for definitions.NoStandard Importance0INTL-02Do you have a data protection officer (DPO)?See GDPR Chapter 4, Section 4, for DPO information.YesStandard Importance0INTL-03Will you sign appropriate GDPR Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs) with the institution?See GDPR Chapter 5, Art. 46, for SCC information.YesStandard Importance0INTL-04Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in China?See PIPL Chapter 1 for definitions.NoStandard Importance0INTL-05Do you comply with PIPL security, privacy, and data localization requirements?See PIPL Chapter 5 for requirements.YesStandard Importance0Data PrivacyBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideDRPV-01Have you performed a Data Privacy Impact Assessment for the solution/project?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-02Do you provide an end-user privacy notice about privacy policies and procedures that identify the purpose(s) for which personal information is collected, used, retained, and disclosed?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-03Do you describe the choices available to the individual and obtain implicit or explicit consent with respect to the collection, use, and disclosure of personal information?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-04Do you collect personal information only for the purpose(s) identified in the agreement with an institution or, if there is none, the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice?This includes quality assurance, marketing and advertising, etc.YesStandard Importance0DRPV-05Do you have a documented list of personal data your service maintains?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-06Do you retain personal information for only as long as necessary to fulfill the stated purpose(s) or as required by law or regulation and thereafter appropriately dispose of such information?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-07Do you provide individuals with access to their personal information for review and update (i.e., data subject rights)?Such processes would include descriptions of request processes individuals can follow to review their information and written processes a data subject may use to ask for changes or corrections to data held about them.YesStandard Importance0DRPV-08Do you disclose personal information to third parties only for the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice or with the implicit or explicit consent of the individual?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-09Do you protect personal information against unauthorized access (both physical and logical)?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-10Do you maintain accurate, complete, and relevant personal information for the purposes identified in the privacy notice?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-11Do you have procedures to address privacy-related noncompliance complaints and disputes?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-12Do you "anonymize," "de-identify," or otherwise mask personal data?YesStandard Importance0DRPV-13Do you or your subprocessors use or disclose "anonymized," "de-identified," or otherwise masked data for any purpose other than those identified in the agreement with an institution (e.g., sharing with ad networks or data brokers, marketing, creation of profiles, analytics unrelated to services provided to institution)?NoStandard Importance0DRPV-14Do you certify stop-processing requests, including any data that is processed by a third party on your behalf?Provide evidence of existing processes or policies. The internal privacy policy should explain your organization's policies and practices regarding the collection of personal information and other data about individuals.YesStandard Importance0DRPV-15Do you have a process to review code for ethical considerations?YesStandard Importance0Privacy and AIBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideDPAI-01Does your service use AI for the processing of institutional data?NoStandard Importance0DPAI-02Is any institutional data retained in AI processing?*NoCritical Importance0DPAI-03Do you have agreements in place with third parties or subprocessors regarding the protection of customer data and use of AI?*YesCritical Importance0DPAI-04Will institutional data be processed through a third party or subprocessor that also uses AI?NoStandard Importance0DPAI-05Is AI processing limited to fully licensed commercial enterprise AI services?YesMinor Importance0DPAI-06Will institutional data be used or processed by any shared AI services?Provide detailed response to the type of data needed for the AI service to function appropriately, the sources of the data, and whether any data shared with the AI service comes from data sources outside the institution.NoMinor Importance0DPAI-07Do you have safeguards in place to protect institutional data and data privacy from unintended AI queries or processing?YesMinor Importance0DPAI-08Do you provide choice to the user to opt out of AI use?YesMinor Importance0PRIVACY REFERENCE QUESTIONS -these fields cannot be edited and must be changed on the "Institution Evaluation" tab.IDQuestionVendor AnswerAdditional InformationGuidanceAnalyst NotesCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideNon-Negotiable?Company InformationBack to ScorecardCOMP-01Do you have a dedicated software and system development team(s) (e.g., customer support, implementation, product management, etc.)?*YesStandard ImportanceCOMP-02Describe your organization's business background and ownership structure, including all parent and subsidiary relationships.Include circumstances that may involve offshoring or multinational agreements.Not scoredCOMP-03Have you operated without unplanned disruptions to this solution in the past 12 months?YesMinor ImportanceCOMP-04Do you have a dedicated information security staff or office?YesMinor ImportanceRequired QuestionsBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideREQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?Not scoredREQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?Answer "yes" if your solution handles personal health information (PHI), either directly or via a third party.Not scoredREQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?Answer yes if your solution handles PCI (credit card) information, either directly or via a third party.Not scoredREQU-08Does your solution have access to personal or institutional data?This includes patient data, student data, employment data, human research data, financial data, etc.Not scoredDocumentationBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideDOCU-01Do you have a well-documented business continuity plan (BCP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*YesCritical ImportanceDOCU-03Have you undergone a SSAE 18/SOC 2 audit?YesStandard ImportanceDOCU-04Do you conform with a specific industry standard security framework (e.g., NIST Cybersecurity Framework, CIS Controls, ISO 27001, etc.)?YesStandard ImportanceDOCU-05Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams, including a full description of the data flow for all components of the system?YesStandard ImportanceDOCU-06Does your organization have a data privacy policy?YesStandard ImportanceDOCU-07Do you have a documented, and currently implemented, employee onboarding and offboarding policy?YesStandard ImportanceIT AccessibilityBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideITAC-05Web Link to Accessibility Statement or VPATVPAT can also be added as an attachmentNot scoredITAC-07Will your company agree to meet your stated accessibility standard or WCAG 2.1 AA as part of your contractual agreement for the solution?*YesCritical ImportanceAssessment of Third PartiesBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideTHRD-01Do you perform security assessments of third-party companies with which you share data (e.g., hosting providers, cloud services, PaaS, IaaS, SaaS)?*YesCritical ImportanceTHRD-02Do you have contractual language in place with third parties governing access to institutional data?*List each third party and why institutional data is shared with them. Format example: [Third Party Name] - ReasonYesCritical ImportanceTHRD-03Do the contracts in place with these third parties address liability in the event of a data breach?*YesCritical ImportanceTHRD-04Do you have an implemented third-party management strategy?*Robust answers from the solution provider improve the quality and efficiency of the security assessment process.YesCritical ImportanceConsulting ServicesBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideCONS-01Will the consultant require access to the institution's network resources?*NoCritical ImportanceCONS-02Has the consultant received training on (sensitive, HIPAA, PCI, etc.) data handling?*YesCritical ImportanceCONS-03Is the data encrypted (at rest) while in the consultant's possession?*YesCritical ImportanceCONS-04Can access be restricted based on source IP address?*YesCritical ImportanceCONS-05Will the consulting take place on-premises?NoStandard ImportanceCONS-06Will the consultant require access to hardware in the institution's data centers?NoStandard ImportanceCONS-07Will the consultant require an account within the institution's domain (@*.edu)?NoStandard ImportanceCONS-08Will any data be transferred to the consultant's possession?NoStandard ImportanceCONS-09Will the consultant need remote access to the institution's network or systems?NoStandard ImportanceApplication/Service SecurityBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideAPPL-01Are access controls for institutional accounts based on structured rules, such as role-based access control (RBAC), attribute-based access control (ABAC), or policy-based access control (PBAC)?*This includes end users, administrators, service accounts, etc. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.YesCritical ImportanceAPPL-02Are you using a web application firewall (WAF)?*YesCritical ImportanceAPPL-08Are access controls for staff within your organization based on structured rules, such as RBAC, ABAC, or PBAC?This includes system administrators and third-party personnel with access to the system. PBAC would include various dynamic controls such as conditional access, risk-based access, location-based access, or system activity-based access.YesStandard ImportanceAuthentication, Authorization, and Account ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideAAAI-01Does your solution support single sign-on (SSO) protocols for user and administrator authentication?*Answer "yes" only if user AND administrator authentication is supported. If partially supported, answer "no." Ensure you respond to any guidance in the Additional Information column.YesCritical ImportanceAAAI-02For customers not using SSO, does your solution support local authentication protocols for user and administrator authentication?*YesCritical ImportanceAAAI-12For customers not using SSO, does your application support integration with other authentication and authorization systems?YesStandard ImportanceAAAI-13Do you allow the customer to specify attribute mappings for any needed information beyond a user identifier? (e.g., Reference eduPerson, ePPA/ePPN/ePE)YesStandard ImportanceAAAI-17For customers not using SSO, does your application and/or user frontend/portal support multifactor authentication (e.g., Duo, Google Authenticator, OTP, etc.)?YesMinor ImportanceChange ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideCHNG-01Will the institution be notified of major changes to your environment that could impact the institution's security posture?*YesCritical ImportanceCHNG-02Does the system support client customizations from one release to another?*Ensure that all relevant details pertaining to CHNG-06 are clearly stated in your response.YesCritical ImportanceDataBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideDATA-03Is the storage of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., disk encryption, at-rest, files, and within a running database)?*YesCritical ImportanceDATA-04Do all cryptographic modules in use in your solution conform to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS PUB 140-2 or 140-3)?*YesCritical ImportanceDATA-06Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained even through a provider acquisition or bankruptcy event?*YesCritical ImportanceDATA-07Do backups containing the institution's data ever leave the institution's data zone either physically or via network routing?*NoCritical ImportanceDATA-08Is media used for long-term retention of business data and archival purposes stored in a secure, environmentally protected area?*YesCritical ImportanceDATA-09At the completion of this contract, will data be returned to the institution and/or deleted from all your systems and archives?Please specify if it will be returned, deleted, or both. YesStandard ImportanceDATA-10Can the institution extract a full or partial backup of data?YesStandard ImportanceDATA-11Do current backups include all operating system software, utilities, security software, application software, and data files necessary for recovery?YesStandard ImportanceDATA-12Are you performing off-site backups (i.e., digitally moved off site)?YesStandard ImportanceDATA-13Are physical backups taken off-site (i.e., physically moved off site)?YesStandard ImportanceDATA-14Are data backups encrypted?YesMinor ImportanceDATA-15Do you have a media handling process that is documented and currently implemented that meets established business needs and regulatory requirements, including end-of-life, repurposing, and data-sanitization procedures?YesStandard ImportanceDATA-17Does your staff (or third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?NoStandard ImportanceDATA-22Are involatile backup copies made according to predefined schedules and securely stored and protected?Ensure that response addresses involatile storage and lists retention periods.YesMinor ImportanceDATA-23Do you have a cryptographic key management process (generation, exchange, storage, safeguards, use, vetting, and replacement) that is documented and currently implemented, for all system components (e.g., database, system, web, etc.)?Summarize your cryptographic key management process.YesMinor ImportanceDatacenterBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideDCTR-01Select your hosting option.If you are using an option not listed, or a combination of options, select "Other." Your selection here will determine which questions below are required.Not scoredDCTR-03Are you generally able to accommodate storing each institution's data within its geographic region?YesStandard ImportanceFirewalls, IDS, IPS, and NetworkingBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideFIDP-01Are you utilizing a stateful packet inspection (SPI) firewall?*YesCritical ImportanceFIDP-02Do you have a documented policy for firewall change requests?*YesCritical ImportanceFIDP-03Have you implemented an intrusion detection system (network-based)?*YesCritical ImportanceFIDP-04Do you employ host-based intrusion detection?*YesCritical ImportanceFIDP-05Are audit logs available for all changes to the network, firewall, IDS, and IPS systems?*YesCritical ImportanceFIDP-09Are you employing any next-generation persistent threat (NGPT) monitoring?YesStandard ImportancePolicies, Processes, and ProceduresBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePPPR-03Is your company subject to the institution's geographic region's laws and regulations?*State the country that governs and regulates your company.YesCritical ImportancePPPR-04Can you accommodate encryption requirements using open standards?YesStandard ImportancePPPR-10Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?YesMinor ImportancePPPR-11Do you have an information security awareness program?YesMinor ImportancePPPR-12Is security awareness training mandatory for all employees?YesMinor ImportancePPPR-14Do you have documented, and currently implemented, internal audit processes and procedures?YesMinor ImportancePPPR-15Does your organization have physical security controls and policies in place?YesMinor ImportanceIncident HandlingBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideHFIH-01Do you have a formal incident response plan?YesStandard ImportanceHFIH-02Do you either have an internal incident response team or retain an external team?YesMinor ImportanceHFIH-03Do you have the capability to respond to incidents on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?YesMinor ImportanceHFIH-04Do you carry cyber-risk insurance to protect against unforeseen service outages, data that is lost or stolen, and security incidents?YesMinor ImportanceVulnerability ManagementBack to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideVULN-01Are your systems and applications scanned with an authenticated user account for vulnerabilities (that are remediated) prior to new releases?*YesCritical ImportanceVULN-02Will you provide results of application and system vulnerability scans to the institution?*YesCritical ImportanceVULN-04Have your systems and applications had a third-party security assessment completed in the last year?YesStandard ImportanceVULN-06Are your systems and applications regularly scanned externally for vulnerabilities?YesMinor ImportanceHIPAA Compliance Back to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverrideHIPA-01Do your workforce members receive regular training related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules and the HITECH Act?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical ImportanceHIPA-02Have you identified areas of risk?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical ImportanceHIPA-03Have the relevant policies/plans been tested?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical ImportanceHIPA-04Have you entered into a Business Associate Agreements with all subcontractors who may have access to protected health information (PHI)?*Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesCritical ImportanceHIPA-05Do you monitor or receive information regarding changes in HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-06Has your organization designated HIPAA Privacy and Security officers as required by the rules?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-07Do you comply with the requirements of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-08Have you conducted a risk analysis as required under the HIPAA Security Rule?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-09Have you taken actions to mitigate the identified risks?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-10Does your application require user and system administrator password changes at a frequency no greater than 90 days?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-11Does your application require users to set their own password after an administrator reset or on first use of the account?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-12Does your application lock out an account after a number of failed login attempts?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-13Does your application automatically lock or log-out an account after a period of inactivity?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-14Are passwords visible in plain text, whether when stored or entered, including service level accounts (i.e., database accounts, etc.)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.NoStandard ImportanceHIPA-15If the application is institution-hosted, can all service level and administrative account passwords be changed by the institution?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-16Does your application provide the ability to define user access levels?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-17Does your application support varying levels of access to administrative tasks defined individually per user?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-18Does your application support varying levels of access to records based on user ID?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.NoStandard ImportanceHIPA-19Is there a limit to the number of groups to which a user can be assigned?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-20Do accounts used for solution provider-supplied remote support abide by the same authentication policies and access logging as the rest of the system?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-21Does the application log record access including specific user, date/time of access, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-22Does the application log administrative activity, such as user account access changes and password changes, including specific user, date/time of changes, and originating IP or device?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-23Do you retain logs for at least as long as required by HIPAA regulations?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-24Can the application logs be archived?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-25Can the application logs be saved externally?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-26Do you have a disaster recovery plan and emergency mode operation plan?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-27Can you provide a HIPAA compliance attestation document?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-28Are you willing to enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA)?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesStandard ImportanceHIPA-29Do your data backup and retention policies and practices meet HIPAA requirements?Refer to HIPAA regulations documentation for supplemental guidance in this section.YesMinor ImportancePayment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)Back to ScorecardCompliant ResponseCompliant OverrideDefault ImportanceImportance OverridePCID-01Do you have a current, executed within the past year, Attestation of Compliance (AoC) or Report on Compliance (RoC)?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesCritical ImportancePCID-02Is the application listed as an approved Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS) application?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNoCritical ImportancePCID-03Does the system or solutions use a third party to collect, store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?*Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNoCritical ImportancePCID-04Do your systems or solutions store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard ImportancePCID-05Are you compliant with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard ImportancePCID-06Are you classified as a service provider?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard ImportancePCID-07Are you on the list of Visa approved service providers?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard ImportancePCID-08Are you classified as a merchant? If so, what level (1, 2, 3, 4)?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesStandard ImportancePCID-09Describe the architecture employed by the system to verify and authorize credit card transactions.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scoredPCID-10What payment processors/gateways does the system support?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scoredPCID-11Can the application be installed in a PCI DSS-compliant manner?Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionYesMinor ImportancePCID-12Include documentation describing the system's abilities to comply with the PCI DSS and any features or capabilities of the system that must be added or changed in order to operate in compliance with the standards.Refer to PCI DSS Security Standards for supplemental guidance in this sectionNot scoredCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSE
Sheet 12: Analyst Reference
HECVAT Analyst ReferenceCopyright (c) 2025 EDUCAUSEConnect with your higher education peers by joining the EDUCAUSE HECVAT Users Community GroupYou can find full tutorials on the HECVAT at educause.edu/HECVATThis sheet provides additional context on each questions for analysts at institutions. In most cases, you will find a reason for each question as well as follow-up inquiries that may be helpful.Use the "find" feature (CTRL+F on a PC or Command+F on a Mac) to search for a question code General InformationReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesGNRL-01Solution Provider NameGNRL-02Solution NameGNRL-03Solution DescriptionGNRL-04Solution Provider Contact NameGNRL-05Solution Provider Contact TitleGNRL-06Solution Provider Contact EmailGNRL-07Solution Provider Contact Phone NumberGNRL-08Country of Company HeadquartersGNRL-09Employee Work Locations (all)Determines where solution provider employees will be physically located.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.End Table Data Company InformationReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesCOMP-01Do you have a dedicated software and system development team(s) (e.g., customer support, implementation, product management, etc.)?*Understanding the development team size (and capabilities) of a solution provider has a significant impact on their ability to produce and maintain code, adhering to secure coding best practices. The size of a solution provider will determine their use of dedicated development teams, or lack thereof. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements.Follow-up inquiries for solution provider team strategies will be unique to your institution and may depend on the underlying infrastructures needed to support a system for your specific use case.COMP-02Describe your organization's business background and ownership structure, including all parent and subsidiary relationships.This information defines the scale of company (support, resources, skillsets), general information about the organization that may be concerning.Follow-up responses to this one are normally unique to their response. Vague answers here usually result in some footprinting of a solution provider to determine their "reputation."COMP-03Have you operated without unplanned disruptions to this solution in the past 12 months?We want transparency from the solution provider, and an honest answer to this question, regardless of the response, is a good step in building trust.If a solution provider says "yes," it is taken at face value. If your organization is capable of conducting reconnaissance, it is encouraged. If a solution provider has experienced a breach, evaluate the circumstances of the incident and what the solution provider has done in response to the breach.COMP-04Do you have a dedicated information security staff or office?The size and capabilities of a solution provider's security program have a significant impact on its ability to respond effectively to a security incident. The size of a solution provider will determine their security operation size or lack thereof. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements.Vague responses to this question should be investigated further. Solution Providers without dedicated security personnel commonly have no security or security is embedded or dual-homed within operations (administrators). Ask about separation of duties, principle of least privilege, etc. There are many ways to get additional program state information from the solution provider.COMP-05Use this area to share information about your environment that will assist those who are assessing your company's data security program.For the 20% that HECVAT may not cover, this gives the solution provider a chance to support their other responses. Beware when this area is populated with sales hype or other irrelevant information. Thorough documentation, supporting evidence, and/or robust responses go a long way in building trust in this assessment process.This is a freebie to help the solution provider state their case. If a solution provider does not add anything here (or it is just sales stuff), we can assume it was filled out by a sales engineer and questions will be evaluated with higher scrutiny.End Table Data Required QuestionsReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesRequired Questions indicate to the solution provider which questions apply to their product or service. REQU-01Are you offering a cloud-based product?The answer to this question indicates if the "Product" and "Infrastructure" tabs are requiredREQU-02Does your product or service have an interface?The answer to this question indicates if the "IT Accessibility" questions are requiredREQU-03Are you providing consulting services?The answer to this question indicates if the "Consulting" questions are requiredREQU-04Does your solution have AI features, or are there plans to implement AI features in the next 12 months?The answer to this question indicates if the "AI" questions are requiredREQU-05Does your solution process protected health information (PHI) or any data covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)?The answer to this question indicates if the "HIPAA" questions are requiredREQU-06Is the solution designed to process, store, or transmit credit card information?The answer to this question indicates if the "PCI DSS" questions are requiredREQU-07Does operating your solution require the institution to operate a physical or virtual appliance in their own environment or to provide inbound firewall exceptions to allow your employees to remotely administer systems in the institution's environment?The answer to this question indicates if the "On-Premises Data Solutions" questions are requiredEnd Table Data DocumentationReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesDOCU-01Do you have a well-documented business continuity plan (BCP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*Testing a business continuity plan is an important action that improves the efficiency and accuracy of a solution provider's continuity plans. Vague responses to this question should be met with concern and appropriate follow-up, based on your institutions risk tolerance.DOCU-02Do you have a well-documented disaster recovery plan (DRP), with a clear owner, that is tested annually?*Testing a disaster recovery plan is an important action that improves the efficiency and accuracy of a solution provider's recovery plans. Vague responses to this question should be met with concern and appropriate follow-up, based on your institutions risk tolerance.DOCU-03Have you undergone a SSAE 18/SOC 2 audit?SSAE 18 and SOC2 audits are standard documentation, relevant to institutions requiring a solution provider to undergo SSAE 18 audits.Follow-up inquiries for SSAE 18 content will be institution/implementation specific.DOCU-04Do you conform with a specific industry standard security framework (e.g., NIST Cybersecurity Framework, CIS Controls, ISO 27001, etc.)?The details of the standard are not the focus here; it is the fact that a solution provider builds their environment around a standard and that they continually evaluate and assess their security programs.In an ideal world, a solution provider will conform to an industry framework that is adopted by an institution. When this synergy does not exist, the interpretation of the solution provider's responses must be interpreted in the context of the institution's environment. Follow-up inquires for industry frameworks (and levels of adoption) will be institution/implementation specific.DOCU-05Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams, including a full description of the data flow for all components of the system?Managing and protecting institution data is the reason organizations perform security and risk assessments. Privacy policies outline how solution providers will obtain, use, share, and protect institutional data and as such, should be robust in its language. Beware of vaguely worded privacy policies.Inquire about any privacy language the solution provider may have. It may not be ideal but there may be something available to assess or enough to have your legal counsel or policy/privacy professionals review.DOCU-06Does your organization have a data privacy policy?Managing and protecting institutional data is the reason organizations perform security and risk assessments. Privacy policies outline how solution providers will obtain, use, share, and protect institutional data and as such, should be robust in its language. Beware of vaguely worded privacy policies.Inquire about any privacy language the solution provider may have. It may not be ideal but there may be something available to assess or enough to have your legal counsel or policy/privacy professionals review.DOCU-07Do you have a documented, and currently implemented, employee onboarding and offboarding policy?Managing and protecting a solution provider's assets through appropriate human resource management is of upmost importance. Knowing how roles and access controls are implemented (directed by policy) within a solution provider's infrastructure during the onboarding and offboarding processes is indicative of how access control is regarded in other areas on the provider (solution provider).Unsatisfactory answers should be met with questions about access control authority, roles and responsibilities (of access grantors), administrative privileges within the solution provider's infrastructure(s), etc.End Table Data Assessment of Third PartiesReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesTHRD-01Do you perform security assessments of third-party companies with which you share data (e.g., hosting providers, cloud services, PaaS, IaaS, SaaS)?*In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on system integrity, ensuring that system changes are only executed by authorized users. Additionally, it is expected that devices (for administrators, solution provider staff, and affiliates) that are used to access the solution provider's systems are properly managed and secured.Follow up with a robust question set if the solution provider cannot clearly state full control of the integrity of their system(s). Questions about administrator access on end-user devices and other maintenance and patching type questions are appropriate.THRD-02Do you have contractual language in place with third parties governing access to institutional data?*The sharing of institutional data to fourth-parties may increase the risk to the institution and thus, we want to know who gets what data, when they get that data, and why they get that data.Follow-up inquiries concerning third-party data sharing will be institution/implementation specific.THRD-03Do the contracts in place with these third parties address liability in the event of a data breach?*Knowing the protections and legal agreements in place for third-party data sharing may assist analysts in determining residual risk.Follow-up inquiries concerning legal agreements with third parties will be institution/implementation specific.THRD-04Do you have an implemented third-party management strategy?*Every organization needs to actively understand and manage its supply chain. The solution provider's understanding of who their third-party partners are and their ability to manage those relationships effectively and consistently speaks to the amount of risk your institution is taking on by contracting with them. Modern technologies allow for rapid deployment of features and with them come changes to an established code environment. The focus of this question is to verify a solution provider's practice of regression testing their code and verifying that previously nonexistent risks are not introduced into a known, secured environment.If "No," inquire if there are plans to implement these processes. Ask the solution provider to summarize their decision behind not scanning their assets for vulnerabilities. Be sure that the solution provider answers for both systems AND applications. Do not let good practices in one overshadow deficiencies in the other.THRD-05Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your hardware supply chain (e.g., telecommunications equipment, export licensing, computing devices)?Understanding a solution provider's hardware supply chain can reveal infrastructure risks that may not be apparent by other means. In some cases, the use of trusted components may be favorable. In others, it may initiate the assessment of the solution provider's environment in more detail and/or expand the scope of the institution's assessment.Follow-up inquiries concerning hardware supply chain will be institution/implementation specific.Change ManagementReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesCHNG-01Will the institution be notified of major changes to your environment that could impact the institution's security posture?*Notification expectations should be set earlier in the contract/assessment process. Timelines, correspondence medium, and playbook details are all aspects to keep in mind when assessing this response.If the solution provider's response does not cover the details outlined in the reasoning, follow up and get specific responses for each, as needed.CHNG-02Does the system support client customizations from one release to another?*The solution provider's solution characteristics and the institution's use case will determine the relevancy of this question. The purpose of this question is to understand the underlying infrastructure and how it is maintained across all customers.In cases where the solution is customized for customer use cases, ensure the solution provider's response covers all aspects of code migration, including backups, data conversions, local resources from the institution, etc., as it relates to code upgrades and/or version adoptions.CHNG-03Do you have an implemented system configuration management process (e.g., secure "gold" images, etc.)?*Hardware lifecycles and continuous software updates creates an always-changing landscape in information technology. The focus of this question is the integrity of a solution provider's infrastructure. Mismanagement of system configurations can lead to breakdowns in layers of security.Solution Providers should have robust documentation when it comes to configuration management. Vague answers to this question should be met with concern. Inquire about the device management tools in use, system lifecycles, complexity of systems, etc., and evaluate the response in the context of company capabilities (see Company Background section).CHNG-04Do you have a documented change management process?The lack of a change management function is indicative of immature program processes. Answers to this question can provide insight into how well their responses (on the HECVAT) represent their actual environment(s).If a weak response is given to this answer, response scrutiny should be increased. Questions about configuration management, system authority, and documentation are appropriate.CHNG-05Does your change management process minimally include authorization, impact analysis, testing, and validation before moving changes to production?This question outlines a mature change management process. Changes should be analyzed for impact, officially approved, tested, and performed by authorized users.If the solution provider's response does not cover the details outlined in the reasoning, follow up and get specific responses, as needed.CHNG-06Does your change management process verify that all required third-party libraries and dependencies are still supported with each major change?This question is fundamentally about supply chain. The solution provider should be able to document its procedures around tracking libraries maintained by third parties.If the solution provider's response does not cover the details outlined in the reasoning, follow-up and get specific responses for each, as needed.CHNG-07Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, managing how critical patches are applied to all systems and applications?Answers to this question will reveal the solution provider's knowledge of their IT assets and their ability to respond to notifications about their systems and software.Follow-up inquiries for the solution provider's patching practices will be institution/implementation specific.CHNG-08Have you implemented policies and procedures that guide how security risks are mitigated until patches can be applied?New vulnerabilities are published every day, and solution providers have a responsibility to maintain their software(s). The fundamental nature of operation will expose some risks to the system, but it is crucial that a solution provider recognize its responsibilities and have a plan to implement them, when this time arrives.Follow-up inquiries for the solution providers patching practices will be institution/implementation specific.CHNG-09Do clients have the option to not participate in or postpone an upgrade to a new release?Unplanned and/or unexpected changes in a complex environment can introduce intolerable risks to the institution. Based on the operating environment of the institution, it may be necessary to postpone (or properly plan) the change to a system. The solution provider's response should clarify their use of a "one code base" method or the ability to run multiple versions concurrently.Follow-up inquiries for solution version releases will be institution/implementation specific.CHNG-10Do you have a fully implemented solution support strategy that defines how many concurrent versions you support?Supporting multiple versions of a solution is challenging. Understanding the solution provider's strategy and resources will provide insight into its ability to adequately support their customers.Follow-up inquiries for the solution provider's support of concurrent versions will be institution/implementation specific.CHNG-11Do you have a release schedule for product updates?Answers to this question will reveal the solution provider's ability to plan in the short term. This is valuable information for customers so they can anticipate updates and potential bug fixes.Follow-up inquiries for the solution provider's solution update practices will be institution/implementation specific.CHNG-12Do you have a technology roadmap, for at least the next two years, for enhancements and bug fixes for the solution being assessed?Answers to this question will reveal the solution provider's ability to plan for the future of their solution.Follow-up inquiries for the solution provider's technology planning practices will be institution/implementation specific.End Table Data CHNG-13Can solution updates be completed without institutional involvement (i.e., technically or organizationally)?The response to this question allows the institution to understand the information technology resources required to properly maintain the solution provider's system. Initial acquisition and setup is important to assess, but the long-term maintenance (and the risks that come with it) should be clearly defined. Use the response to this question to pivot to other questions and/or verify other solution provider responses.Vague responses to this question should be investigated further. Ask for additional documentation for customer responsibilities (in the context of information technology/security).CHNG-14Are upgrades or system changes installed during off-peak hours or in a manner that does not impact the customer?Restricting system updates to a standard maintenance timeframe is important for ensuring that changes to production systems do not impact operations. It's also important for troubleshooting any problems that may occur as a result of the changes.If the solution provider's response does not cover the details outlined in the reasoning, follow up and get specific responses, as needed.CHNG-15Do procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-fact approval)?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on system integrity, ensuring that system changes are only executed by authorized users. In the event of emergency changes, accountability and post-action review are expected.Follow up with a robust question set if a solution provider cannot clearly state full control of the integrity of their system(s).CHNG-16Do you have a systems management and configuration strategy that encompasses servers, appliances, cloud services, applications, and mobile devices (company and employee owned)?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on system integrity, ensuring that system changes are only executed by authorized users. Additionally, it is expected that devices (for administrators, solution provider staff, and affiliates) that are used to access the solution provider's systems are properly managed and secured.Follow up with a robust question set if the solution provider cannot clearly state full control of the integrity of their system(s). Questions about administrator access on end-user devices and other maintenance and patching type questions are appropriate.Policies, Processes, and ProceduresReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPPPR-01Do you have a documented patch management process?*In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on system integrity, ensuring that system changes are only executed according to policy. Additionally, it is expected that devices used to access the solution provider's systems are properly managed and secured.Follow up with a robust question set if the solution provider cannot clearly state full control of their system patching strategy. Questions about patch testing, testing environments, threat mitigation, incident remediation, etc., are appropriate.End Table Data PPPR-02Can your organization comply with institutional policies on privacy and data protection with regard to users of institutional systems, if required?*This is a general inquiry to determine if the solution provider has reviewed the institution's policies and is committed to complying with them.If a solution provider is vague in their response, follow up with direct questions about the institution's policies and ensure the expectation of compliance is clear with the solution provider.PPPR-03Is your company subject to the institution's geographic region's laws and regulations?*This is a general inquiry to determine if the solution provider is well-versed in applicable laws and regulations that apply in the institution's region of business operation.If a solution provider is vague in their response, follow up with direct questions about doing business in your state/region/country and any laws that are pertinent to the institution.PPPR-04Can you accommodate encryption requirements using open standards?Beware the use of proprietary encryption implementations. Open standard encryption, preferably mature, is often preferred. Although there may be cases in which that is not the case, be sure to understand the solution provider's infrastructure and the true security of a solution provider's solution.If the solution provider cannot accommodate open standards encryption requirements, direct them to NIST's Cryptographic Standards and Guidelines document <https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Cryptographic-Standards-and-Guidelines>.PPPR-05Do you have a documented systems development life cycle (SDLC)?Mature solution lifecycle management can position a solution provider to sufficiently plan, implement, and manage systems that better protect institutional data.Although withdrawn by NIST, the Security Considerations in the Systems Development Life Cycle (SP 800-64r2) document is an excellent resource to provide guidance to solution providers (i.e., set expectations). Follow-up questions to SDLC use will be institution/implementation specific.PPPR-06Do you perform background screenings or multi-state background checks on all employees prior to their first day of work?The use of detective and preventive controls in the hiring process serves a valuable role in protecting institutional data. As these are often HR documented policies, a solution provider should have their practices well-documented and ready for review, upon request.Ask the solution provider if background checks and/or screening are conducted in any capacity, at any time during the employment period. Ask about the precautions they take to ensure the intellectual property is secured and inquire if user data is treated in an appropriate manner.PPPR-07Do you require new employees to fill out agreements and review policies?Setting the expectation of performance and increasing awareness of security-related responsibilities are part of these initial-hiring documents. Oftentimes these agreements and reviews are conducted during orientation for new employees.If a solution provider's practices are not clear, inquire about training requirements for employees, especially the frequency and scope of content.PPPR-08Do you have a documented information security policy?A shared security [responsibility] environment is expected of solution providers in today's world. Security offices alone cannot protect an institution's data. Information security, ingrained in an organization, is the best case scenario for the protection of institutional data. Security awareness and practice start in a solution provider's policies. The ability for the solution provider to respond effectively (and quickly) to a security incident is of the utmost importance. The size of a solution provider's security office will determine its capabilities during a security incident, but the incident response plan will oftentimes determine its effectiveness. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly when discussing degraded operation states.If the solution provider does not have an incident response plan, point them to the NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final>.PPPR-09Are information security principles designed into the product lifecycle?The adherence to secure coding best practices better positions a solution provider to maintain the CIA triad. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly those focused on development and the protection of communications.If information security principles are not designed into the product lifecycle, point the solution provider to OWASP's Secure Coding Practices - Quick Reference Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Secure_Coding_Practices_-_Quick_Reference_Guide>.PPPR-10Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?This is a general inquiry to determine if the solution provider is well-versed in applicable laws and regulations that apply in the institution's region of business operation.If a solution provider is vague in their response, follow up with direct questions about doing business in your state/region/country and any laws that are pertinent to the institution.PPPR-11Do you have an information security awareness program?Setting the expectation of security-related responsibilities throughout an organization is favored in an information security awareness program. Solution Providers without an information security awareness campaign should be met with scrutiny on how security policies and procedures are implemented in their environment.Follow-up inquiries for information security awareness programs will be institution/implementation specific.End Table Data PPPR-12Is security awareness training mandatory for all employees?Setting the expectation of security-related responsibilities throughout an organization is favored in an information security awareness program. Solution Providers without an information security awareness campaign should be met with scrutiny on how security policies and procedures are implemented in their environment.Follow-up inquiries for information security awareness programs will be institution/implementation specific.PPPR-13Do you have process and procedure(s) documented, and currently followed, that require a review and update of the access list(s) for privileged accounts?Protecting privileged accounts is crucial to maintaining system integrity in any environment. This question is targeting privilege creep and unmanaged privileged accounts to determine if the solution provider properly manages access control in their application/system environments.Ask the solution provider to summarize their implemented policies and/or procedures.PPPR-14Do you have documented, and currently implemented, internal audit processes and procedures?The role of an internal auditor is to verify implemented controls and highlight areas in need of improvement. Solution Providers without internal audit processes and procedures should be met with scrutiny on how security policies and procedures are monitored and verified in their environment.Follow-up inquiries for internal audit processes and procedures will be institution/implementation specific.PPPR-15Does your organization have physical security controls and policies in place?This question aims to understand the physical security state of the solution provider's operating environment and whether or not physical assets are appropriately protected.Follow-up inquiries for physical security controls and policies will be institution/implementation specific.Authentication, Authorization, and Account ManagementReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAAAI-01Does your solution support single sign-on (SSO) protocols for user and administrator authentication?*This question is to set account management expectations for the institution. A system that can integrate with existing, vetted solutions has its advantages and may have less administrative overhead. Also, adherence to standards here gives credit to other standards-oriented questions/responses.Follow-up inquiries for IAM requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-02For customers not using SSO, does your solution support local authentication protocols for user and administrator authentication?*The purpose of this question is understand the solution provider's authentication infrastructure so that additional questions can be formulated for the institution's use case. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. The content of this response may or may not have value for the type of use case on the institution. Follow-up inquiries for authentication modes will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-03For customers not using SSO, can you enforce password/passphrase complexity requirements (provided by the institution)?*Many institutions have a policy focused on passwords/passphrases, and this question confirms the capacity of a solution provider's solution to comply. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Follow-up inquiries for password/passphrase complexity requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-04For customers not using SSO, does the system have password complexity or length limitations and/or restrictions?*Many institutions have a policy focused on passwords/passphrases, and this question confirms the capacity of a solution provider's solution to comply. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Follow-up inquiries for password/passphrase limitations and/or restrictions will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-05For customers not using SSO, do you have documented password/passphrase reset procedures that are currently implemented in the system and/or customer support?*Account management can be a time-consuming part of an information system. Account reset capabilities, built into a system, can reduce burden on institutional support services. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Ask the solution provider how end users will be supported. Ask for training documentation or knowledgebase content. Confirm solution provider and institution responsibilities in this support area (and others).AAAI-06Does your organization participate in InCommon or another eduGAIN-affiliated trust federation?*This question defines the solution provider's scope of federated identity practices and their willingness to embrace higher education requirements.If a solution provider indicates that a system is stand-alone and cannot integrate with community standards, follow up with maturity questions and ask about other commodity type functions or other system requirements your institution may have.AAAI-07Are there any passwords/passphrases hard-coded into your systems or solutions?*The response to this question can reveal the use (or not) of coding best practices. If passwords/passphrases are hard-coded into systems/productions, the solution provider should provide robust details supporting why this is required.Vague responses to this question should be met with concern. Repeat the question if the first answer is insufficient. Ask pointedly to ensure the solution provider is not misunderstanding.AAAI-08Are you storing any passwords in plaintext?*The focus of this question is confidentiality. It is a straightforward question confirming the encryption of user authentication details.Follow-up inquiries for password/passphrase encrypted storage will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-09Are audit logs available that include AT LEAST all of the following: login, logout, actions performed, and source IP address?*Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a system. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk. Depending on your risk tolerance and the use case, your institution may or may not be concerned. The focus of this question is end-user logs.If a weak response is given, it is appropriate to ask directed questions to get specific information. Ensure that questions are targeted to ensure responses will come from the appropriate party within the solution provider.AAAI-10Describe or provide a reference to the (a) system capability to log security/authorization changes, as well as user and administrator security events (i.e., physical or electronic), such as login failures, access denied, changes accepted; and (b) all requirements necessary to implement logging and monitoring on the system. Include (c) information about SIEM/log collector usage.*Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a system. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk. Depending on your risk tolerance and the use case, your institution may or may not be concerned. The focus of this question is system-related logs (including but not limited to events, state changes, control modification, etc.).If a weak response is given, it is appropriate to ask directed questions to get specific information. Ensure that questions are targeted to ensure responses will come from the appropriate party within the solution provider.End Table Data AAAI-11Can you provide the institution documentation regarding the retention period for those logs, how logs are protected, and whether they are accessible to the customer (and if so, how)?*There are multiple components of this question. When assessing, ensure that the solution provider responds to them all. Logs that are not properly managed may not be available when needed. The purpose of this question is to ensure that the solution provider has a proper security mindset to ensure proper monitoring practices.Follow-up inquiries for logging details will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-12For customers not using SSO, does your application support integration with other authentication and authorization systems?This question is to set account management expectations for the institution. A system that can integrate with existing, vetted solutions has its advantages and may have less administrative overhead. Also, adherence to standards here gives credit to other standards-oriented questions/responses. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. If a solution provider indicates that a system is stand-alone and cannot integrate with the institution's infrastructure, follow up with maturity questions and ask about other commodity type functions or other system requirements your institution may have.AAAI-13Do you allow the customer to specify attribute mappings for any needed information beyond a user identifier? (e.g., Reference eduPerson, ePPA/ePPN/ePE)This questions allows an institution to know solution provider system limitations and to help them gauge the resources (that may be needed to implement) required to successfully integrate the solution with institution systems.Follow-up inquiries for attribute mapping requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-14For customers not using SSO, does your application support directory integration for user accounts?System (technical and security) administration is complex, and it is important to understand a system's capabilities to integrate with existing security and access systems. Having to maintain additional accounts increases overhead and may impact your institution's risk footprint. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Follow-up inquiries for system authentication will be unique to your institution (e.g., policy, infrastructure, etc.).AAAI-15Does your solution support any of the following web SSO standards: SAML2 (with redirect flow), OIDC, CAS, or other?This question is to set account management expectations for the institution. A system that can integrate with existing, vetted solutions has its advantages and may have less administrative overhead. Also, adherence to standards here gives credit to other standards-oriented questions/responses.Follow-up inquiries for IAM requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-16Do you support differentiation between email address and user identifier?This questions allows an institution to know solution provider system limitations and to help them gauge the resources (that may be needed to implement) required to successfully integrate the solution with institution systems.Follow-up inquiries for identifier requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-17For customers not using SSO, does your application and/or user frontend/portal support multifactor authentication (e.g., Duo, Google Authenticator, OTP, etc.)?2FA/MFA, implemented correctly, strengthens the security state of a system. 2FA/MFA is commonly implemented and in many use cases is a requirement for account protection purposes. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Ask the solution provider about hardware and software options, future roadmap for implementations and support, etc.AAAI-18Does your application automatically lock the session or log out an account after a period of inactivity?This is a question to ensure account integrity and institutional data confidentiality.Follow-up inquiries for inactivity protections will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-08Are you storing any passwords in plaintext?*The focus of this question is confidentiality. It is a straightforward question confirming the encryption of user authentication details.Follow-up inquiries for password/passphrase encrypted storage will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-09Are audit logs available that include AT LEAST all of the following: login, logout, actions performed, and source IP address?*Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a system. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk. Depending on your risk tolerance and the use case, your institution may or may not be concerned. The focus of this question is end-user logs.If a weak response is given, it is appropriate to ask directed questions to get specific information. Ensure that questions are targeted to ensure responses will come from the appropriate party within the solution provider.AAAI-10Describe or provide a reference to the (a) system capability to log security/authorization changes, as well as user and administrator security events (i.e., physical or electronic), such as login failures, access denied, changes accepted; and (b) all requirements necessary to implement logging and monitoring on the system. Include (c) information about SIEM/log collector usage.*Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a system. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk. Depending on your risk tolerance and the use case, your institution may or may not be concerned. The focus of this question is system-related logs (including but not limited to events, state changes, control modification, etc.).If a weak response is given, it is appropriate to ask directed questions to get specific information. Ensure that questions are targeted to ensure responses will come from the appropriate party within the solution provider.AAAI-11Can you provide the institution documentation regarding the retention period for those logs, how logs are protected, and whether they are accessible to the customer (and if so, how)?*There are multiple components of this question. When assessing, ensure that the solution provider responds to them all. Logs that are not properly managed may not be available when needed. The purpose of this question is to ensure that the solution provider has a proper security mindset to ensure proper monitoring practices.Follow-up inquiries for logging details will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-12For customers not using SSO, does your application support integration with other authentication and authorization systems?This question is to set account management expectations for the institution. A system that can integrate with existing, vetted solutions has its advantages and may have less administrative overhead. Also, adherence to standards here gives credit to other standards-oriented questions/responses. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. If a solution provider indicates that a system is stand-alone and cannot integrate with the institution's infrastructure, follow up with maturity questions and ask about other commodity type functions or other system requirements your institution may have.AAAI-13Do you allow the customer to specify attribute mappings for any needed information beyond a user identifier? (e.g., Reference eduPerson, ePPA/ePPN/ePE)This questions allows an institution to know solution provider system limitations and to help them gauge the resources (that may be needed to implement) required to successfully integrate the solution with institution systems.Follow-up inquiries for attribute mapping requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-14For customers not using SSO, does your application support directory integration for user accounts?System (technical and security) administration is complex, and it is important to understand a system's capabilities to integrate with existing security and access systems. Having to maintain additional accounts increases overhead and may impact your institution's risk footprint. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Follow-up inquiries for system authentication will be unique to your institution (e.g., policy, infrastructure, etc.).AAAI-15Does your solution support any of the following web SSO standards: SAML2 (with redirect flow), OIDC, CAS, or other?This question is to set account management expectations for the institution. A system that can integrate with existing, vetted solutions has its advantages and may have less administrative overhead. Also, adherence to standards here gives credit to other standards-oriented questions/responses.Follow-up inquiries for IAM requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-16Do you support differentiation between email address and user identifier?This questions allows an institution to know solution provider system limitations and to help them gauge the resources (that may be needed to implement) required to successfully integrate the solution with institution systems.Follow-up inquiries for identifier requirements will be institution/implementation specific.AAAI-17For customers not using SSO, does your application and/or user frontend/portal support multifactor authentication (e.g., Duo, Google Authenticator, OTP, etc.)?2FA/MFA, implemented correctly, strengthens the security state of a system. 2FA/MFA is commonly implemented and in many use cases is a requirement for account protection purposes. If you will be using SSO, consider marking this question as "Do Not Score" in column J of the evaluation tab. Ask the solution provider about hardware and software options, future roadmap for implementations and support, etc.AAAI-18Does your application automatically lock the session or log out an account after a period of inactivity?This is a question to ensure account integrity and institutional data confidentiality.Follow-up inquiries for inactivity protections will be institution/implementation specific.End Table Data DataReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesDATA-01Will the institution's data be stored on any devices (database servers, file servers, SAN, NAS, etc.) configured with non-RFC 1918/4193 (i.e., publicly routable) IP addresses?*Systems that are directly exposed to public internet resources are at greater risk than those that are not. Understanding the requirements for this configuration is important, particularly when assessing compensating controls.Ask the solution provider about its infrastructure and if there is a solution that eliminates the need for this environment.DATA-02Is the transport of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., system-to-client)?*The need for encryption in transport is unique to your institution's implementation of a system. In particular, the data flow between the system and the end users of the solution.Follow-up inquiries for data encryption between the system and end-users will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-03Is the storage of sensitive data encrypted using security protocols/algorithms (e.g., disk encryption, at-rest, files, and within a running database)?*The need for encryption at-rest is unique to your institution's implementation of a system. In particular, system components, architectures, and data flows all factor into the need for this control.Follow-up inquiries for data encryption at-rest will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-04Do all cryptographic modules in use in your solution conform to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS PUB 140-2 or 140-3)?*Beware the use of proprietary encryption implementations. Open standard encryption, preferably mature, is often preferred. Although there may be cases in which that is not the case, be sure to understand the solution provider's infrastructure and the true security of a solution provider's solution.If the solution provider cannot accommodate open standards encryption requirements, direct them to NIST's Cryptographic Standards and Guidelines document <https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Cryptographic-Standards-and-Guidelines>.DATA-05Will the institution's data be available within the system for a period of time at the completion of this contract?*When cancelling a solution, an institution will commonly want all institutional data that was provided to a solution provider. This questions allows the solution provider to state their general practices when a customer leaves their environment.A solution provider's response should be clear and concise. Be wary of vague responses to this questions and inquire about export specifics, as needed.DATA-06Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained even through a provider acquisition or bankruptcy event?*This question clarifies the position of the institution in the case of acquisition or bankruptcy. Expect clear responses to this question. If they are vague, be sure to follow up based on institutional counsel guidance.If a solution provider's response is unsatisfactory, engage institutional counsel to appropriately address any ownership concerns.DATA-07Do backups containing the institution's data ever leave the institution's data zone either physically or via network routing?*Data exposure is a risk if sensitive data is in any way transported (physically or electronically) into a data zone that is not authorized by the institution. Depending on the criticality of data and institution policy, full control of data confidentiality may be highly valued.Follow-up inquiries for data backup procedures/practices will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-08Is media used for long-term retention of business data and archival purposes stored in a secure, environmentally protected area?*Managing media (and the data within) throughout its lifecycle is crucial to the protection of institutional data. The focus of this question is confidentiality, ensuring that media that may store institutional data is protected by well-established policy and procedure.Vague responses to this question should be investigated further. Ask for additional documentation and verify that procedure (and possibly training) exists to ensure proper media handling activity.DATA-09At the completion of this contract, will data be returned to the institution and/or deleted from all your systems and archives?When cancelling a solution, an institution will commonly want all institutional data that was provided to a solution provider. This question allows the solution provider to state its general practices when a customer leaves its environment.A solution provider's response should be clear and concise. Be wary of vague responses to this questions and inquire about export specifics, as needed.DATA-10Can the institution extract a full or partial backup of data?When cancelling a solution, an institution will commonly want all institutional data that was provided to a solution provider. The solution provider's response should verify if the institution can extract data or if it is a manual extraction by solution provider staff.A solution provider's response should be clear and concise. Be wary of vague responses to this questions and inquire about export specifics, as needed.DATA-11Do current backups include all operating system software, utilities, security software, application software, and data files necessary for recovery?The purpose of this question is to define the scope of backup operations and the scope at which a solution provider may readily recover when backup restoration is required.Follow-up inquiries for backup content scope will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-12Are you performing off-site backups (i.e., digitally moved off site)?When data is moved digitally (e.g., cloud provider, solution provider-owned facility, etc.) off-site, the policies and implemented procedures are important to know. The protections implemented to prevent compromise will be technical in nature and should be well-documented.Follow-up inquiries for off-site, digital backups will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-13Are physical backups taken off-site (i.e., physically moved off site)?When data is moved physically (e.g., print, etc.) off-site, the policies and implemented procedures are important to know. Unencrypted data taken outside secured areas introduces unnecessary risks.Follow-up inquiries for off-site, physical backups will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-14Are data backups encrypted?The need for encryption at rest (for backups) is unique to your institution's implementation of a system. In particular, system components, architectures, and data flows all factor into the need for this control.Follow-up inquiries for data backup encryption at-rest will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-15Do you have a media handling process that is documented and currently implemented that meets established business needs and regulatory requirements, including end-of-life, repurposing, and data-sanitization procedures?Managing media (and the data within) throughout its lifecycle is crucial to the protection of institutional data. The focus of this question is confidentiality, ensuring that media that may store institutional data is protected by well-established policy and procedure.Vague responses to this question should be investigated further. Ask for additional documentation and verify that procedure (and possibly training) exists to ensure proper media handling activity.DATA-16Does the process described in DATA-15 adhere to DoD 5220.22-M and/or NIST SP 800-88 standards?Managing media (and the data within) throughout its lifecycle is crucial to the protection of institutional data. The focus of this question is confidentiality, ensuring that media that may store institutional data is protected by well-established policy and procedure.Follow-up inquiries for DoD 5220.22-M and/or SP800-88 standards will be institution specific.End Table Data DATA-17Does your staff (or third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?Confidentiality is the focus of this question. Based on the capabilities of solution provider administrators, the institution may require additional safeguards to protect the confidentiality of data stored by or shared with a solution provider (e.g., additional layer of encryption, etc.).If institutional data is visible by the solution provider's system administrators, follow up with the solution provider to understand the scope of visibility, process/procedure that administrators follow, and use cases when administrators are allowed to access (view) institutional data.DATA-18Do you have a documented and currently implemented strategy for securing employee workstations when they work remotely (i.e., not in a trusted computing environment)?Telecommuting in the IT world is the norm, and an institution should know that proper safeguards are in place when remote access is allowed. Solution Provider responses vary greatly, so confirm the context of the response if it is not clear. Many cloud services can only be managed remotely, so there is often a gray area to interpret for this response. In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on confidentiality. Printed documents, mobile device use, and remote access are all relevant to this question. A solution provider's response to this question will provide insight into their overall business process. Solution Provider business activity that poses additional security risks should be met with increased concern.Vague responses to this question should be investigated further. Ask for additional documentation and verify that procedure (and possibly training) exists to ensure proper customer data handling activity.DATA-19Does the environment provide for dedicated single-tenant capabilities? If not, describe how your solution or environment separates data from different customers (e.g., logically, physically, single tenancy, multi-tenancy).A solution provider's response to this question can reveal a system's infrastructure quickly. Off-point responses are common here, so general follow-up is often needed. Understanding how a solution provider segments its customers' data (or doesn't) affects various other controls, including network settings, use of encryption, access controls, etc. A solution provider's response here will influence potential follow-up inquiries for other HECVAT questions.Follow-up inquiries for dedicated single-tenant capabilities will be institution/implementation specific.DATA-20Are ownership rights to all data, inputs, outputs, and metadata retained by the institution?This question clarifies the operating model of a solution provider and provides insight into the solution provider-customer paradigm of a company. Knowing whether the institution is of value to a solution provider or if the institution's data is of value to a solution provider should weigh heavily in the decision-making process.If a solution provider's response is unsatisfactory, engage institutional counsel to appropriately address any ownership concerns.DATA-21In the event of imminent bankruptcy, closing of business, or retirement of service, will you provide 90 days for customers to get their data out of the system and migrate applications?This question clarifies the position of the institution in the case of acquisition or bankruptcy. Expect clear responses to this question. If they are vague, be sure to follow up based on institutional counsel guidance.If a solution provider's response is unsatisfactory, engage institutional counsel to appropriately address any ownership concerns.DATA-22Are involatile backup copies made according to predefined schedules and securely stored and protected?Restricting system updates to a standard maintenance timeframe is important for ensuring that changes to production systems do not impact operations. It's also important for troubleshooting any problems that may occur as a result of the changes. Availability is the focus of this question.An institution's use case will drive the requirements for backup strategy. Ensure that the institution's use case and risk tolerance can be met by solution provider systems.DATA-23Do you have a cryptographic key management process (generation, exchange, storage, safeguards, use, vetting, and replacement) that is documented and currently implemented, for all system components (e.g., database, system, web, etc.)?Understanding how key management is handled and the safeguards implemented by the solution provider to ensure key confidentiality in all components of a system(s) can provide insight into other complex details of a solution provider's infrastructure. Use solution provider responses to this question as a way to pivot to other infrastructure specifics, as needed to clarify potential risks.Follow up with the solution provider to ensure that all components of the system are considered. This includes system-to-system, system-to-client, applications, system accounts, etc.Application/Service SecurityReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAPPL-01Are access controls for institutional accounts based on structured rules, such as role-based access control (RBAC), attribute-based access control (ABAC), or policy-based access control (PBAC)?*Understanding access control capabilities allows an institution to estimate the type of maintenance efforts will be involved to manage a system. Depending on the users, concerns may or not be elevated. The value of this question is largely determined by the deployment strategy and use case of the solution under review. This question is specific to end users.Ask the solution provider to summarize the best practices to restrict/control the access given to the institution's end users without the use of RBAC. Make sure to understand the administrative requirements/overhead introduced in the solution provider's environment.APPL-02Are you using a web application firewall (WAF)?*The use case, solution provider infrastructure, and types of services offered will greatly affect the need for various firewalling devices. The focus of this question is integrity, ensuring that the systems hosting institutional data are limited in need-only communications. The use of a WAF is important in systems in which a solution provider has limited access to the code infrastructure.If a solution provider states that they outsource their code development and do not run a WAF, there is elevated reason for concern. Verify how code is tested, monitored, and controlled in production environments.APPL-03Are only currently supported operating system(s), software, and libraries leveraged by the system(s)/application(s) that will have access to institution's data?*Solution Provider responses to this question provide clarity on environment constraints that may exist and/or influence future development, configurations, infrastructure, etc. Although the solution provider response may not directly affect end users, the risks of the underlying infrastructure are better understood.Follow-up inquiries for operating systems leveraged by the solution provider will be institution/implementation specific.APPL-04Does your application require access to location or GPS data?*Sharing location data significantly increases risk factors for users. It's important to understand if this is required.Ask the solution provider about the need for this requirement, and understand any mitigation strategies that may be possible.APPL-05Does your application provide separation of duties between security administration, system administration, and standard user functions?*Managing a solution may rely on various teams to administrate a system. In this question, it is security operations and systems administration. This question is focused on how system(s) administration, and the segregation of duties, are implemented in the solution provider's organization, so that system administrators do not also have security responsibilities (e.g., monitoring, mitigating, reporting, etc.).Ask the solution provider to summarize their best practices for securing their system(s) administratively without the use of RBAC. Make sure to understand the administrative requirements/overhead introduced in the solution provider's environment.APPL-06Do you subject your code to static code analysis and/or static application security testing prior to release?*Code analysis (prior to implementation) can decrease the number of vulnerabilities within a system. Depending on the insight a solution provider has into their code, code testing should be expected. When a solution provider outsources their coding efforts, the use of a web application firewall may be appropriate. In this case, reference the solution provider's response to their use of a WAF.Ask the solution provider what types of tools they use in testing and who performs the testing of the code. Are developers the ones running the security tests? If static code analysis and/or static application security testing is not conducted, point the solution provider to OWASP's Testing Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Testing_Guide_v4_Table_of_Contents>.APPL-07Do you have software testing processes (dynamic or static) that are established and followed?*Code analysis (prior to implementation) can decrease the number of vulnerabilities within a system. Depending on the insight a solution provider has into their code, code testing should be expected.If software testing processes are not established and followed, point the solution provider to OWASP's Testing Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Testing_Guide_v4_Table_of_Contents>.APPL-08Are access controls for staff within your organization based on structured rules, such as RBAC, ABAC, or PBAC?Managing a solution may rely on various professionals to administer a system. This question is focused on how administration, and the segregation of functions, is implemented within the solution provider's infrastructure.Managing a complex infrastructure requires diligence in protecting access and authority. Unsatisfactory responses may indicate the lack of maturity with a solution provider and/or a flat infrastructure with few individuals with broad authority. Inquire about separation of duties and look for areas of inappropriate functional overlap.APPL-09Does the system provide data input validation and error messages?Input validation is a secure coding best practice, so confirming its implementation is normally a high priority. Error messages (to the system and user) can be used to detect abnormal use and to better protect institutional data. Depending on the criticality of data and the flow of said data, an institution's risk tolerance will be unique to their environment.Inquire about any planned improvements to these capabilities. Ask about their product roadmap, and try to understand how they prioritize security concerns in their environment.APPL-10Do you have a process and implemented procedures for managing your software supply chain (e.g., libraries, repositories, frameworks, etc.)?Understanding system requirements and/or dependencies (e.g., libraries, repositories, frameworks, toolkits, modules, etc.) can reveal infrastructure risks that may not be apparent by other means. In some cases, the use of trusted components may be favorable. In others, it may initiate the assessment of the solution provider's environment in more detail and/or expand the scope of the institution's assessment.Follow-up inquiries concerning software supply chain will be institution/implementation specific.APPL-11Have your developers been trained in secure coding techniques?The adherence to secure coding best practices better positions a solution provider to maintain the CIA triad. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly those focused on development and the protection of communications.If information security principles are not designed into the product lifecycle, point the solution provider to OWASP's Secure Coding Practices - Quick Reference Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Secure_Coding_Practices_-_Quick_Reference_Guide>.APPL-12Was your application developed using secure coding techniques?The adherence to secure coding best practices better positions a solution provider to maintain the CIA triad. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly those focused on development and the protection of communications.If information security principles are not designed into the product lifecycle, point the solution provider to OWASP's Secure Coding Practices - Quick Reference Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Secure_Coding_Practices_-_Quick_Reference_Guide>.APPL-13If mobile, is the application available from a trusted source (e.g., App Store, Google Play Store)?Distributing application via known, moderately vetted application platform decreases the chances of malicious code distribution. Stand-alone deployments (nontrusted sources) should be looked at more closely.Ask the solution provider why this deployment strategy is used. Ask if it is a restriction of the app store platform or some other environment restriction.APPL-14Do you have a fully implemented policy or procedure that details how your employees obtain administrator access to institutional instance of the application?Protecting administrative accounts is crucial to maintaining system integrity in any environment. This question is targeting privilege creep and unmanaged privileged accounts to determine if the solution provider properly manages access control in their application/system environments.Ask the solution provider to summarize their implemented policies and/or proceduresDatacenterReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesDCTR-01Select your hosting option.Understanding the hosting environment may reveal infrastructure risks that may not be apparent by other means and provides context to the responses provided throughout this HECVAT.Follow-up inquiries for hosting options will be institution/implementation specific.End Table Data DCTR-02Is a SOC 2 Type 2 report available for the hosting environment?This question is relative to the response above. Understanding the ownership structure of the facility that will host institutional data is important for setting availability expectations and ensuring that proper contract terms are in place to protect the institution due to use of third parties. If a solution provider uses a third-party solution provider to provide data center solutions, having that solution provider's SOC 2 Type 2 provides additional insight. The ability to assess these "forth-party" solution providers is based on your institution's resources. The solution provider is responsible for providing this information; ensure that they handle their solution providers properly.Follow-up inquiries for additional solution provider's SOC 2 Type 2 reports will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-03Are you generally able to accommodate storing each institution's data within its geographic region?An institution's location will dictate what laws and regulations apply. Because solution providers may not know where all of their customers reside, it is imperative that solution providers are able to accommodate geographic requirements for their customers. Although it is unfair to expect support for all geographic regions in common infrastructure/platform/software-as-a-service, solution providers are expected to be absolutely clear about the regions they leverage and/or support.If a solution provider is unable to accommodate storing/processing institutional data within specific regions, ask them why they are unable to. Try to determine if it's an infrastructure issue (scalability), a cost-reduction strategy (size/maturity), or some other issue.DCTR-04Are the data centers staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week (i.e., 24 x 7 x 365)?Solution Providers that operate their own datacenter(s) can implement their own monitoring strategy. Use the solution provider's response to this questions to verify/validate other responses related to ownership/co-location/physical security.Follow-up inquiries for data center staffing will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-05Are your servers separated from other companies via a physical barrier, such as a cage or hard walls?This question is primarily focused on system integrity. If institutional data is stored in a system that is not physically secured from unauthorized access, the need for compensating controls is often higher. Depending on the use case or solution provider infrastructure, this may not be relevant.Follow-up inquiries for system physical security will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-06Does a physical barrier fully enclose the physical space, preventing unauthorized physical contact with any of your devices?*This question is primarily focused on system integrity. If institutional data is stored in a system that is not physically secured from unauthorized access, the need for compensating controls is often higher. Depending on the use case or solution provider infrastructure, this may not be relevant.Follow-up inquiries for system physical security will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-07Are your primary and secondary data centers geographically diverse?When planning for business continuity and disaster recovery, considering geographic diversity of a solution provider's operating environment will help analysts better understand risk due to widespread technical issues as well as weather and environmental considerations.Follow-up inquiries for geographic diversity in datacenters will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-08Is the service hosted in a high-availability environment?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on the availability of a system (or set of systems).The weight placed on the solution provider's response will be specific to the institution's use case and solution requirements.DCTR-09Is redundant power available for all data centers where institutional data will reside?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on the availability of a system (or set of systems).The weight placed on the solution provider's response will be specific to the institution's use case and solution requirements.DCTR-10Are redundant power strategies tested?*Installing (potential) redundant power and regularly testing strategies to ensure they will work when needed are very different. Vague responses to this question should be met with concern and appropriate follow up, based on your institution's risk tolerance.Follow-up inquiries for redundant power testing details will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-11Does the center where the data will reside have cooling and fire-suppression systems that are active and regularly tested?Installing appropriate environmental controls is crucial to maintaining the integrity of the hosting site. Vague responses to this question should be met with concern and appropriate follow up, based on your institutions risk tolerance.Follow-up inquiries for cooling and fire suppression systems will be institution/implementation specific.DCTR-12Do you have Internet Service Provider (ISP) redundancy?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on the availability of a system (or set of systems).The weight placed on the solution provider's response will be specific to the institution's use case and solution requirements.DCTR-13Does every data center where the institution's data will reside have multiple telephone company or network provider entrances to the facility?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on the availability of a system (or set of systems).The weight placed on the solution provider's response will be specific to the institution's use case and solution requirements.DCTR-14Do you require multifactor authentication for all administrative accounts in your environment?2FA/MFA, implemented correctly, strengthens the security state of a system. 2FA/MFA is commonly implemented and in many use cases is a requirement for account protection purposes.Ask the solution provider about hardware and software options, future roadmap for implementations and support, etc.DCTR-15Are you using your cloud provider's available hardening tools or pre-hardened images?In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on the integrity of a system (or set of systems).Ask the solution provider about their system lifecycle practices and security methodology.DCTR-16Does your cloud solution provider have access to your encryption keys?Understanding how key management is handled and the safeguards implemented by the solution provider to ensure key confidentiality in all components of a system(s) can provide insight into other complex details of a solution provider's infrastructure. Use solution provider responses to this question as a way to pivot to other infrastructure specifics, as needed to clarify potential risks.Follow up with the solution provider to ensure that all components of the system are considered. This includes system-to-system, system-to-client, applications, system accounts, etc.Firewalls, IDS, IPS, and NetworkingReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesFIDP-01Are you utilizing a stateful packet inspection (SPI) firewall?*The use case, vendor infrastructure, and types of services offered will greatly affect the need for various firewalling devices. The focus of this question is integrity, ensuring that the systems hosting institutional data are limited in need-only communications.Follow-up inquiries for firewall capabilities will be institution/implementation specific.FIDP-02Do you have a documented policy for firewall change requests?*In the context of the CIA triad, this question is focused on system integrity, ensuring that system changes are only executed by authorized users. Any change to a verified, known, secure environment should be carefully evaluated by stakeholders in a structured manner.Follow-up inquiries for firewall change requests will be institution/implementation specific.FIDP-03Have you implemented an intrusion detection system (network-based)?*It is important to have detective capabilities in an information system to protect institutional data. Because this is somewhat expected in information systems, solution providers without IDSs implemented should raise concerns. Compensating controls need future evaluation, if provided by the solution provider.A security program with limited resources for event detection is not effective. Inquiries should include training for staff, reasoning behind not using IDS technologies, and how systems are monitored. Additional questions about a SIEM and other tool may be appropriate.FIDP-04Do you employ host-based intrusion detection?*It is important to have detective capabilities in an information system to protect institutional data. Because this is somewhat expected in information systems, solution providers without IDSs implemented should raise concerns. Compensating controls need future evaluation, if provided by the solution provider.Ask the solution provider to summarize why host-based intrusion detection tools are not implemented in their environment. What compensating controls are in place to detect configuration changes and/or failures of integrity?FIDP-05Are audit logs available for all changes to the network, firewall, IDS, and IPS systems?*Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a network. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk.If a weak response is given to this answer, it is an indicator that a nontechnical representative populated the document and response scrutiny should be increased. If a solution provider does not answer appropriately, a follow-up request to have the question fully answered is appropriate.FIDP-06Is authority for firewall change approval documented? Please list approver names or titles in Additional Info.Modifications to firewall rule sets can have significant repercussions. To ensure the integrity of the rule set, this question targets the individual (or responsible party) for changes and the reasoning behind their authority.Ensure that a separation of duties exists in network security configurations. Pay close attention to responsibility overlap in small organizations, where staff often fill multiple roles.FIDP-07Have you implemented an intrusion prevention system (network-based)?It is important to have preventive capabilities in an information system to protect institutional data. Because this is somewhat expected in information systems, solution providers without IPSs implemented should raise concerns. Compensating controls need future evaluation, if provided by the solution provider.A security program with limited resources for active prevention is inefficient. Inquiries should include training for staff, reasoning behind not using IPS technologies, and how systems are actively protected and how malicious activity is stopped.FIDP-08Do you employ host-based intrusion prevention?It is important to have preventive capabilities in an information system to protect institutional data. Because this is somewhat expected in information systems, solution providers without IPSs implemented should raise concerns. Compensating controls need future evaluation, if provided by the solution provider.Ask the solution provider to summarize why host-based intrusion prevention tools are not implemented in their environment. What compensating controls are in place to detect malicious activity and to actively prevent its function?FIDP-09Are you employing any next-generation persistent threat (NGPT) monitoring?This question is primarily focused on determining the maturity of a solution provider's security program and their ability to implement and operate cutting-edge technologies. Investment in advanced technologies may indicate appropriate security program capabilities.Follow-up inquiries for next-generation persistent threat monitoring will be institution/implementation specific.FIDP-10Is intrusion monitoring performed internally or by a third-party service?This question is primarily focused on the capability of a solution provider's security program. Understanding the size and skillsets of a solution provider (taken from other responses) is needed to determine the appropriateness of the solution provider's response to this question.Follow-up inquiries for intrusion monitoring will be institution/implementation specific.FIDP-11Do you monitor for intrusions on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?This question is primarily focused on system(s) integrity. If institutional data is stored in a system that is not physically secured from unauthorized access, the need for compensating controls is often higher. Depending on the use case or solution provider infrastructure, this may not be relevant.Follow-up inquiries for 24 x 7 x 365 monitoring will be institution/implementation specific.Incident HandlingReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesHFIH-01Do you have a formal incident response plan?The ability for the solution provider to respond effectively (and quickly) to a security incident is of the utmost importance. The size of a solution provider's security office will determine their capabilities during a security incident, but the incident response plan will oftentimes determine their effectiveness. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly when discussing degraded operation states.If the solution provider does not have an incident response plan, direct them to the NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final>.End Table Data HFIH-02Do you either have an internal incident response team or retain an external team?The ability for the solution provider to investigate security incidents is of the utmost importance. Reviewing alerts but then taking no action is not security, only compliance. Incident reports and indications of compromise must be reviewed by qualified staff, and they must have the capability to investigate further, as needed.If the solution provider does not have an incident response plan, direct them to the NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final>.HFIH-03Do you have the capability to respond to incidents on a 24 x 7 x 365 basis?The incident team structure (internal vs. external), size, and capabilities of a solution provider have a significant impact on their ability to respond to and protect an institution's data. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements.If the solution provider does not have an incident response team, direct them to the NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final>.HFIH-04Do you carry cyber-risk insurance to protect against unforeseen service outages, data that is lost or stolen, and security incidents?The capacity for the solution provider to respond effectively (and quickly) to a security incident is of the utmost importance. The size and talent of a solution provider's incident response team will determine their capabilities during a security incident. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly when discussing degraded operation states.If the solution provider does not have an incident response plan, point them to the NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide <https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final>.Vulnerability ManagementReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesVULN-01Are your systems and applications scanned with an authenticated user account for vulnerabilities (that are remediated) prior to new releases?*Modern technologies allow for rapid deployment of features, and with them come changes to an established code environment. The focus of this question is to verify a solution provider's practice of regression testing their code and verifying that previously nonexistent risks are not introduced into a known, secured environment.Ask if there are plans to implement these processes. Ask the solution provider to summarize their decision behind not scanning their applications for vulnerabilities prior to release.VULN-02Will you provide results of application and system vulnerability scans to the institution?*If a solution provider is scanning its applications and/or systems, oftentimes an institution will want to review the report, if possible. Preferably, any finding on the reports will have a matching mitigation action.If a solution provider is hesitant to share the report, ask for a summarized version; some insight is better than none.VULN-03Will you allow the institution to perform its own vulnerability testing and/or scanning of your systems and/or application, provided that testing is performed at a mutually agreed upon time and date?*Many higher education institutions are capable of performing vulnerability assessments and/or penetration testing on their solution providers' infrastructures. This question confirms the possibility of conducting these actions against the solution provider's infrastructure.Follow-up inquiries for vulnerability scanning and penetration testing will be institution/implementation specific.VULN-04Have your systems and applications had a third-party security assessment completed in the last year?External verification of system and application security controls are important when managing a system. Trust, but verify, is the focus of this question. HECVAT responses are taken at face value and verified within reason, in most cases. When a solution provider can attest to and provide externally provided evidence supporting that attestation, it goes a long way in building trust that the solution provider will appropriately protect institutional data.Ask if there has ever been a vulnerability scan. A short lapse in external assessment validity can be understood (if there is a planned assessment), but a significant time lapse or no scan whatsoever is cause for elevated levels of concern.VULN-05Do you regularly scan for common web application security vulnerabilities (e.g., SQL injection, XSS, XSRF, etc.)?The adherence to secure coding best practices better positions a solution provider to maintain the CIA triad. Use the knowledge of this response when evaluating other solution provider statements, particularly those focused on development and the protection of communications. Solution Providers should be monitoring for and addressing these issues in their solutions.If information security principles are not designed into the product lifecycle, point the solution provider to OWASP's Secure Coding Practices - Quick Reference Guide <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Secure_Coding_Practices_-_Quick_Reference_Guide>. Inquire about the tools a solution provider uses, the interval at which systems are monitored/mitigated, and who is responsible for the process/procedure in place for this monitoring.VULN-06Are your systems and applications regularly scanned externally for vulnerabilities?External verification of application security controls is important when managing a system. Trust, but verify, is the focus of this question. HECVAT responses are taken at face value and verified within reason, in most cases. When a solution provider can attest to and provide externally provided evidence supporting that attestation, it goes a long way in building trust that the solution provider will appropriately protect institutional data.If "no," inquire if there has ever been a vulnerability scan. A short lapse in external assessment validity can be understood (if there is a planned assessment), but a significant time lapse or no scan whatsoever is cause for elevated levels of concern.IT AccessibilityReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesITAC-01Solution Provider Accessibility Contact NameITAC-02Solution Provider Accessibility Contact TitleITAC-03Solution Provider Accessibility Contact EmailITAC-04Solution Provider Accessibility Contact Phone NumberITAC-05Web Link to Accessibility Statement or VPATEnd Table Data ITAC-06Has a VPAT or ACR been created or updated for the solution and version under consideration within the past 12 months?*VPATs (Voluntary Product Accessibility Template) / ACRs (Accessibility Conformance Report, a completed VPAT) are standard accessibility reporting formats from the ITIC <https://www.itic.org/policy/accessibility/vpat>. They can be self-assessments from a solution provider, though higher confidence is given if completed by expert third parties. It is important to confirm the version of the product tested and reported on for the VPAT matches the one under consideration.Cross-reference Accessibility Conformance Reports (ACR) with any answers from ITAC-14 about product roadmaps for accessibility improvements.ITAC-07Will your company agree to meet your stated accessibility standard or WCAG 2.1 AA as part of your contractual agreement for the solution?*Federal regulation requires that technology products conform to WCAG 2.1 AA. Technology platforms that do not substantially conform to this standard put schools at risk of not complying with these requirements. ITAC-08Does the solution substantially conform to WCAG 2.1 AA?*Federal regulation requires that technology products conform to WCAG 2.1 AA. Technology platforms that do not substantially conform to this standard put schools at risk of not complying with these requirements. ITAC-09Do you have a documented and implemented process for reporting and tracking accessibility issues?*What is the prioritization of accessibility issues received, and how are they tracked? Is there a regular cadence for tracking and addressing accessibility barriers?ITAC-10Do you have documentation to support the accessibility features of your solution?Has the solution provider documented any additional information needed by users in order to create accessible products with the solution? Are there tutorials, if needed, on how assistive technology users can best use the solution (platforms tested and works best, shortcuts) etc.? In other words, are they taking care of the end users? Accessibility is more than completing checklists.If claims are made about accessibility and there is no supporting documentation on how they can be achieved, ensure that intended configurations and uses of the product in question were assessed for any accessibility documentation or claims.End Table Data ITAC-11Has a third-party expert conducted an audit of the most recent version of your solution?Third-party test results lend more credence to accessibility claims in documentation. It is possible that well-qualified first parties may still deliver meaningful results via a VPAT/ACR. Ensuring results for the most recent versions means purchasing decisions are not made with outdated information. ITAC-12Do you have a documented and implemented process for verifying accessibility conformance?The goal of accessibility is ultimately usability by persons with disabilities. Expert staff and automated testing are important, but automated tools can only detect ~25% of issues so must be supplemented with additional methodologies. Best practice would include testing by people with disabilities. At minimum, some manual testing needs to be conducted in the verification process. The use of overlays or AI plugin solutions to help products "automatically conform" with accessibility guidelines is presently inadequate and should impact scores negatively.ITAC-13Have you adopted a technical or legal standard of conformance for the solution?Knowing the standard solution providers aim for ensures aligned goals. For example, WCAG 2.0 or §508 specify accessibility standards from 2008 that may not meet present needs. WCAG 2.2 is the most current, and 2.1 AA is the most commonly cited current technical accessibility standard. ITAC-14Can you provide a current, detailed accessibility roadmap with delivery timelines?If solution do not fully conform to accessibility standards, it is important that solution providers have a roadmap specifying how they will work to achieve it. A roadmap with delivery timelines is best supported by evidence of prior delivery on such timelines. Analysts can better predict time to conformance and institutions can plan accordingly.If no roadmap is available, seek additional information from the solution provider such as release notes that address accessibility and any feedback from users that address the accessibility of the solution.ITAC-15Do you expect your staff to maintain a current skill set in IT accessibility?Having accessibility expertise within the staff supports the proactive development of accessible solutions. If staff lack sufficient accessibility expertise, then accessibility improvements may only be the result of the solution provider reacting to issues or reports of access barriers submitted by clients of the solution provider.ITAC-16Do you have documented processes and procedures for implementing accessibility into your development lifecycle?This question is designed to understand how accessibility is included in new versions and features of solutions, particularly with solution providers that implement Agile or similar methodologies where software is updated frequently and continuously.ITAC-17Can all functions of the application or service be performed using only the keyboard?One critical accessibility requirement is the full use of a product using only the keyboard, -no mouse or trackpad. This requirement is easy for a nontechnical or non-accessibility expert to understand and verify.To confirm keyboard-only claims, follow the how-to at Minimum Expectations for applications webpage <https://go.iu.edu/minimum-expectations> from Indiana University or reference WebAIM's Keyboard Testing guidance <https://webaim.org/techniques/keyboard/#testing>.End Table Data ITAC-18Does your product rely on activating a special "accessibility mode," a "lite version," or using an alternate interface (including "overlay" or AI-based alternates) for accessibility purposes?Third-party overlays or add-ons are not sufficient for products to conform with accessibility Standards (more information at <https://overlayfactsheet.com>). Lite or alternate versions for accessibility versions are typically not feature equivalent and are less maintained. Plans should be shared on how a provider intends to bridge such a gap and work toward accessibility on the primary product path.Consulting ServicesReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesCONS-01Will the consultant require access to the institution's network resources?*Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-02Has the consultant received training on (sensitive, HIPAA, PCI, etc.) data handling?*Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-03Is the data encrypted (at rest) while in the consultant's possession?*Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-04Can access be restricted based on source IP address?*Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-05Will the consulting take place on-premises?Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-06Will the consultant require access to hardware in the institution's data centers?Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-07Will the consultant require an account within the institution's domain (@*.edu)?Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-08Will any data be transferred to the consultant's possession?Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.CONS-09Will the consultant need remote access to the institution's network or systems?Consultants are often used to implement, maintain, fix, and assess technology environments. In these cases, third-party consultants have access to institutional data, and appropriate access, whether remote or onsite, must be protected during the consulting engagement.Follow-up inquiries will be institution/implementation specific.HIPAA Compliance Reason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesHIPA-01Do your workforce members receive regular training related to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules and the HITECH Act?*HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-02Have you identified areas of risk?*HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-03Have the relevant policies/plans been tested?*HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-04Have you entered into a Business Associate Agreements with all subcontractors who may have access to protected health information (PHI)?*HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-05Do you monitor or receive information regarding changes in HIPAA regulations?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-06Has your organization designated HIPAA Privacy and Security officers as required by the rules?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-07Do you comply with the requirements of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-08Have you conducted a risk analysis as required under the HIPAA Security Rule?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-09Have you taken actions to mitigate the identified risks?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-10Does your application require user and system administrator password changes at a frequency no greater than 90 days?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-11Does your application require users to set their own password after an administrator reset or on first use of the account?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-12Does your application lock out an account after a number of failed login attempts?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-13Does your application automatically lock or log-out an account after a period of inactivity?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-14Are passwords visible in plain text, whether when stored or entered, including service level accounts (i.e., database accounts, etc.)?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-15If the application is institution-hosted, can all service level and administrative account passwords be changed by the institution?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-16Does your application provide the ability to define user access levels?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-17Does your application support varying levels of access to administrative tasks defined individually per user?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-18Does your application support varying levels of access to records based on user ID?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.End Table Data HIPA-19Is there a limit to the number of groups to which a user can be assigned?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-20Do accounts used for solution provider-supplied remote support abide by the same authentication policies and access logging as the rest of the system?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-21Does the application log record access including specific user, date/time of access, and originating IP or device?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-22Does the application log administrative activity, such as user account access changes and password changes, including specific user, date/time of changes, and originating IP or device?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-23Do you retain logs for at least as long as required by HIPAA regulations?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-24Can the application logs be archived?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-25Can the application logs be saved externally?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-26Do you have a disaster recovery plan and emergency mode operation plan?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-27Can you provide a HIPAA compliance attestation document?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-28Are you willing to enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA)?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.HIPA-29Do your data backup and retention policies and practices meet HIPAA requirements?HIPAARefer to HIPAA documentation or your institution's Chief HIPAA Security Officer.Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)Reason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPCID-01Do you have a current, executed within the past year, Attestation of Compliance (AoC) or Report on Compliance (RoC)?*PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.End Table Data PCID-02Is the application listed as an approved Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS) application?*PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-03Does the system or solutions use a third party to collect, store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?*PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-04Do your systems or solutions store, process, or transmit cardholder (payment/credit/debt card) data?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-05Are you compliant with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-06Are you classified as a service provider?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-07Are you on the list of Visa approved service providers?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-08Are you classified as a merchant? If so, what level (1, 2, 3, 4)?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-09Describe the architecture employed by the system to verify and authorize credit card transactions.PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-10What payment processors/gateways does the system support?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-11Can the application be installed in a PCI DSS-compliant manner?PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.PCID-12Include documentation describing the system's abilities to comply with the PCI DSS and any features or capabilities of the system that must be added or changed in order to operate in compliance with the standards.PCI DSSRefer to PCI DSS documentation or your institution's treasurer's office.End Table Data On-Premises Data SolutionsReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesOPEM-01Do you support role-based access control (RBAC) for system administrators?Managing a solution may rely on various professionals to administer a system. This question is focused on how administration, and the segregation of functions, can be implemented within the system. Securing the administration portion of a system has additional implications (e.g., logging, administration, etc.) beyond that of end users.Ask the solution provider to summarize the best practices for securing their system(s) administratively without the use of RBAC. Make sure to understand the administrative requirements/overhead introduced in the solution provider's environment.OPEM-02Can your employees access customer systems remotely?Telecommuting in the IT world is common. An institution should know that proper safeguards are in place if remote access is allowed. Solution Provider responses vary greatly on this, so confirm the context of the response if it is not clear. Many cloud services can only be managed remotely, so there is often a gray area to interpret for this response.Ask the solution provider to summarize the reasoning behind this business process and request additional documentation that outlines the security controls implemented to safeguard institutional data.OPEM-03Can you provide overall system and/or application architecture diagrams including a full description of the data communications architecture for all components of the system?Many systems can be used a variety of ways. We want these implementation type diagrams so that we can understand the "real" use of the solution.Additional requests for documentation are made when other parts of the HECVAT are insufficient. Although supporting documentation is helpful, many solution providers do not provide it. We try to be specific with our follow-up questions so that solution providers understand we are not looking for 20-50 page whitepapers (sales documentation).OPEM-04Do you require remote management of the system?Telecommuting in the IT world is common. An institution should know that proper safeguards are in place, if remote access is allowed. Solution Provider responses vary greatly on this, so confirm the context of the response if it is not clear. Many cloud services can only be managed remotely, so there is often a gray area to interpret for this response.Ask the solution provider to summarize the reasoning behind this business process and request additional documentation that outlines the security controls implemented to safeguard institutional data.OPEM-05If you answered "yes" to OPEM-04, are your remote actions and changes logged or otherwise visible to the campus?Strong logging capabilities are vital to the proper management of a system. Implementing an immature system that lacks sufficient logging capabilities exposes an institution to great risk. Depending on your risk tolerance and the use case, your institution may or may not be concerned. The focus of this question is remote access logging.If a weak response is given to this answer, it is appropriate to ask directed answers to get specific information. Ensure that questions are targeted to ensure responses will come from the appropriate party within the solution provider.End Table Data OPEM-06If you maintain remote access to the system, will you handle data in a FERPA-compliant manner?This is standard documentation, relevant to institution implementations requiring FERPA compliance.Follow-up inquiries for FERPA compliance details will be institution/implementation specific.OPEM-07Do you support campus status monitoring through SNMPv3 or other means?Standard documentation question. With an on-premise device, the possibility to tie-in with existing monitoring/management systems is beneficial. The solution provider's response should be clear and concise.Follow-up inquiries for monitoring via SNMPv3 will be institution/implementation specific.OPEM-08Describe or provide a reference to any other safeguards used to monitor for malicious activity.This question is primarily focused on system(s) integrity and confidentiality. The solution provider's response should clearly state the system(s) capabilities to properly monitor for (and alert for) malicious activity.Follow-up inquiries for system monitoring will be institution/implementation specific.OPEM-09Describe how long your organization has conducted business in this area.We want to establish longevity of a solution and whether or not a solution provider is new to the higher education space.Normally a solution provider will state their overall longevity but not talk about the software/service/product under evaluation. Follow-ups includes specific questions about the origins of the software/service/product and references will be requested.OPEM-10Do you have existing higher education customers?Higher education is a unique vertical. A solution provider's response to this question can help an analyst set the context for all solution provider responses. Established and/or mature solutions are more likely to have current higher education customers, and therefore understand the environment that we operate in.A simple "yes" without any references or supporting information should be questioned. Question the size of institutions that are using the solution and the scope of their implementations.End Table Data AI Qualifying QuestionsReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAIQU-01Does your solution leverage machine learning (ML) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?AIQU-02Does your solution leverage a large language model (LLM) or do you plan to do so in the next 12 months?General AI QuestionsReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesEnd Table Data AIGN-01Does your solution have an AI risk model when developing or implementing your solution's AI model?*To ensure the vendor has proactive governance and has a defined, documented risk management strategy that is aligned with responsible AI.Can the AI risk model or framework in use be shared? How often is it reviewed and updated? If an AI framework is not in use, what practices are currently used to address AI risks?AIGN-02Can your solution's AI features be disabled by tenant and/or user?*To verify whether customers have control over AI features and can opt out when AI is not desired or creates compliance concerns.How easy is it to disable/enable AI features?AIGN-03Have your staff completed responsible AI training?*To confirm that staff are educated on ethical AI principles, data stewardship, bias mitigation, and compliance, ensuring responsible use and support for customers.Clarify the structure and enforcement of training supports transparency and accountability in AI-related operations.End Table Data AIGN-04Please describe the capabilities of your solution's AI features.To help institutions understand the scope, functionality, and intended use cases of the AI feature(s) and evaluate whether its capabilities align with institutional needs and risk tolerance.Can documentation of supported AI functions, limitations, and safeguards be provided?AIGN-05Does your solution support business rules to protect sensitive data from being ingested by the AI model?To determine the risk of sensitive data exposure from AI feature inputs and outputs.Can you provide examples of data loss prevention (DLP) features? Where are these DLP solutions implemented? Are these DLP features customizable?AI PolicyReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesEnd Table Data AIPL-01Are your AI developer's policies, processes, procedures, and practices across the organization related to the mapping, measuring, and managing of AI risks conspicuously posted, unambiguous, and implemented effectively?*To ensure that the vendor has established a mature AI governance framework, is prepared to manage the complex and evolving risks of AI, and is not likely to transfer that risk directly to customers.Given that a lack of formal governance can expose our institution to significant legal and reputational risks, how can you assure us that partnering with you will not transfer these liabilities to our organization?AIPL-02Have you identified and measured AI risks?*To help an organization verify that the vendor has a mature, proactive risk management framework in place, which is essential to protect the organization from the legal, financial, and reputational liabilities that can arise from a poorly governed AI system.Can you provide a list of moderate and high AI-specific risks? Can you explain how your company would handle the legal, reputational, and financial liabilities that our organization would face in the event your AI causes a significant incident, such as a privacy breach or an ethical failure?AIPL-03In the event of an incident, can your solution's AI features be disabled in a timely manner?*The ability to disable/enable AI features is essential for containing an incident and preventing a security or ethical failure.Given the critical need for a timely incident response, what is your specific, documented procedure for disabling the AI features; who is authorized to execute it; and can you provide a service level agreement (SLA) or a documented timeline for this process? Does disabling AI features require action by the vendor?AIPL-04If disabled because of an incident, can your solution's AI features be re-enabled in a timely manner?*This helps an organization create a business continuity plan and incident recovery plan.AIPL-05Do you have documented technical and procedural processes to address potential negative impacts of AI as described by the AI Risk Management Framework (RMF)?This question helps maximize the value of the AI feature(s) while minimizing the negative impacts of AI.Are resources that are required to manage risks taken into account? Are mechanisms in place and applied to sustain the value of the deployed AI system? Are mechanisms in place and applied to supersede, disengage, or deactivate AI systems that demonstrate performance or outcomes inconsistent with the intended use?AI Data SecurityReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAISC-01If sensitive data is introduced to your solution's AI model, can the data be removed from the AI model by request?*This question assesses whether the vendor can remove sensitive data from its AI model upon request. This capability is essential for privacy compliance, including GDPR (Right to Erasure), FERPA, and state data protection laws, and it helps institutions ensure that their data is not retained or used beyond its intended purposeIf the vendor does not support data deletion or provides an unclear response, the institution should follow up to determine how the vendor identifies, manages, and minimizes exposure of sensitive data within its AI systems. Ask for documentation or clarification on any compensating controls (e.g., data filtering, temporary memory use), data retention practices, limitations preventing deletion, and whether future support for deletion or unlearning is planned.AISC-02Is user input data used to influence your solution's AI model?*This question helps institutions determine whether their input data is used to train or influence the vendor's AI model. Understanding this protects institutional data from unauthorized reuse, supports compliance with privacy and data protection laws, and ensures that any future change to data use would require institutional consent.If the vendor's response is unclear or incomplete, the institution should ask whether user input data is retained in any form (e.g., logs, embeddings, temporary memory) and how long it is stored. Confirm whether the vendor's data sharing or processing agreement explicitly prohibits the use of institutional data for model training. If the vendor does use user input for model influence, request details on anonymization, opt-out mechanisms, and notification procedures for future changes.AISC-03Do you provide logging for your solution's AI feature(s) that includes user, date, and action taken?*This question helps institutions confirm whether AI features can be audited for user activity, data use, and system behavior. Audit logging supports regulatory compliance, incident response, and transparency in environments handling sensitive or regulated data.If the vendor's response is incomplete, the institution should confirm whether logs are segmented by AI feature, whether log data is reviewed or integrated into the vendor's Security Operations Center processes, and how long logs are retained. Institutions should also verify whether logs are available for institutional review or external audit when required.End Table Data AISC-04Please describe how you validate user inputs.This question helps institutions assess whether the solution protects against anomalous, malicious, or sensitive inputs that could compromise AI features. Input validation supports data integrity, incident prevention, and compliance with FERPA, GDPR, and state privacy and cybersecurity laws.If the vendor's response is unclear, the institution should ask how anomalous or malicious inputs are detected, whether sensitive data is filtered, and where validation occurs (client-side, server-side, or within the AI model). Institutions may also request details on alerting, logging, and safeguards such as rate limiting or input sanitization.AISC-05Do you plan for and mitigate supply-chain risk related to your AI features?This question helps institutions assess whether vendors manage supply chain risks in their AI features, which often rely on third-party models, libraries, and APIs. Institutions need assurance that vendors use practices such as SAST, SBOM, and ongoing monitoring to address vulnerabilities, while aligning with frameworks such as NIST AI RMF, NIST CSF, and Executive Order 14028.If the vendor's response is unclear, the institution should ask whether an SBOM is maintained for AI components, how often third-party models and libraries are reviewed for vulnerabilities, and whether SAST or other testing is performed. Institutions may also confirm whether the vendor's practices align with NIST AI RMF, NIST CSF, or Executive Order 14028 requirements.AI Machine LearningReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAIML-01Do you separate ML training data from your ML solution data?*This question helps institutions determine whether operational data provided through the solution is kept separate from machine learning training data. Without this separation, institutional data could be inadvertently incorporated into global or shared models, creating risks of data leakage, misuse, or exposure to other customers. Ensuring separation also supports compliance with privacy and security requirements under FERPA, GDPR, and state data protection laws and gives institutions control over whether their data may be used for training or model improvement.If the vendor's response is unclear, the institution should ask how data is flagged or excluded from training, whether customer data is ever used in shared/global models, and what opt-out mechanisms are available. Institutions may also request details on data environments used for training versus production.AIML-02Do you authenticate and verify your ML model's feedback?*Verifying ML model feedback helps prevent skewing attacks that could distort predictions or reduce reliability.Understand whether any other controls or processes are in place that would mitigate the risk of the vendor not doing the authentication or verification. How does the vendor perform trigger-sweep evaluations?AIML-03Is your ML training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?This process can reduce the risk of errors or bias, as well as poor data quality undermining the model's accuracy and integrity.What other controls are in place as a substitute to this process? If not all steps are complete, what part of the process is currently being done?AIML-04Is your ML training data monitored and audited?Training data can be targeted by attackers to influence the ML model's behavior in harmful ways.Understand whether any other controls or processes are in place that would mitigate the risk of training data being manipulated by attackers? Do you audit for trojan/backdoor patterns? How do you protect against malicious code injection when using this ML tool for coding? Are trend, alerts flag, rare-token spikes monitored?AIML-05Have you limited access to your ML training data to only staff with an explicit business need?Training data can be targeted by attackers to influence the ML model's behavior in harmful ways.AIML-06Have you implemented adversarial training or other model defense mechanisms to protect your ML-related features?Adversarial training and defenses help keep models resilient against manipulation and evasion attacks.What adversarial training is performed on the ML? What defense mechanisms are incorporated into the ML? How is the input validated for the ML?AIML-07Do you make your ML model transparent through documentation and log inputs and outputs?This process helps ensure accountability and detect misuse or anomalies.How long are input/output logs retained, and how is log data protected? How often are transparency and logging processes reviewed or updated? Do logs enable post-hoc trigger correlation?AIML-08Do you watermark your ML training data?Watermarking training data supports traceability, making it easier to detect misuse and respond to incidents.Are all training datasets watermarked, or only specific subsets? Are there any policies, procedures, or controls in place that would serve as substitutes or compensating measures for this practice?AI Large Language Model (LLM)Reason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesAILM-01Do you limit your solution's LLM privileges by default?*This question addresses misuse, exfiltration/change risk, and over-privileged behavior. It supports accountable operations and auditability.Is the LLM's API token unique? How do you segregate external content from user prompts? Do you manually monitor LLM input and output periodically?AILM-02Is your LLM training data vetted, validated, and verified before training the solution's AI model?*Assures lawful, ethical, and auditable data use while reducing IP and privacy risk. This is key to trustworthy AI and effective audits.Request a dataset register with provenance records, license documentation, and change-control history. Request sample outputs of PII scrubbing/anonymization processes, results of bias/safety evaluations, and records of dataset refresh or retirement events.End Table Data AILM-03Do any actions taken by your solution's LLM features or plugins require human intervention?*Prevents autonomous risky actions or misconfigurations and enforces accountability. This limits excessive agency.Ask which actions the LLM can trigger, what approvals are required, and how approvals are logged. Request RBAC matrices showing approver roles, sample approval/denial tickets, and audit logs of LLM-initiated actions with human overrides. Request rollback playbooks, incident reports of missteps caught by HITL, and evidence of periodic control testing.AILM-04Do you limit multiple LLM model plugins being called as part of a single input?*Reduces supply-chain and prompt-injection risk, controls attack surface, and clarifies accountability. Aligns with governance expectations.Request a list of all plugins/tools callable by the LLM and the allow-listing criteria/review cadence. Ask for the validation approach, sandbox/egress rules, and test evidence.AILM-05Do you limit your solution's LLM resource use per request, per step, and per action?Prevents denial-of-service and cost overruns from excessive or malicious consumption. Demonstrates managed, measurable operations.Request current default versus maximum token/CPU/memory quotas per tenant, monitoring dashboards of usage, and alerts or incidents where throttling was triggered. Ask about runbooks for resource spikes, evidence of recent resource reviews, and escalation paths.AILM-06Do you leverage LLM model tuning or other model validation mechanisms?Mitigates hallucinations and ensures decisions rely on verifiable information. Supports trustworthy outcomes and reduces downstream misuse.Request benchmark and evaluation results with acceptance thresholds, along with logs or reports from fact-checking pipelines, retrieval-augmented validation, or citation verification. Include any red-team or adversarial testing results, records of human review for high-risk outputs, and the release gating criteria tied to evaluation outcomes.INTL-04Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in China?Understanding whether the vendor processes data in China may help with institutional PIPL compliance.If institution's intended use includes targeting of data subjects in China and if vendor marks "no," institution might want to follow up to clarify data collected.INTL-05Do you comply with PIPL security, privacy, and data localization requirements?Vendors targeting services in China should have the ability to comply with PIPL requirements.End Table Data General PrivacyReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPRGN-01Does your solution process FERPA-related data?This question will help the institution gain an understanding of the types of data processed by this product or service.Will data be re-disclosed and/or used for any purpose other than directly providing the service, including quality assurance or marketing?PRGN-02Does your solution process GDPR-related or PIPL-related data?This question will help the institution gain an understanding of the types of data processed by this product or service.PRGN-03Does your solution process personal data regulated by state law(s) (e.g., CCPA)?This question will help the institution gain an understanding of the types of data processed by this product or service.PRGN-04Does your solution process user-provided data that may contain regulated information?This question will help the institution gain an understanding of the types of data processed by this product or service.PRGN-05Web Link to Product/Service Privacy NoticeTo ensure transparency and verify the vendor provides accessible privacy documentation that institutions can review and share with stakeholders.Please provide the direct URL to your privacy policy and confirm how frequently it is reviewed and updated.Privacy-Specific Company DetailsReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPCOM-01Have you had a personal data breach in the past three years that involved reporting to a governmental agency, notice to individuals (including voluntary notice), or notice to another organization or institution?*Having a previous data breach can indicate a level of risk that will indicate that the institution should further investigate changes made after the breach.PCOM-02Use this area to share information about your privacy practices that will assist those who are assessing your company data privacy program.*To gather voluntary disclosures that provide additional context beyond required responses, helping assessors understand the vendor's privacy culture and proactive commitment to data protection.PCOM-03Have you had any violations of your internal privacy policies or violations of applicable privacy law in the past 36 months?This question solicits information about internal privacy policy violations and/or violations of applicable privacy law in the past three years.PCOM-04Do you have a dedicated data privacy staff or office?Any solution provider processing protected student data should have resources/staff dedicated to the protection of the data.Privacy-Specific DocumentationReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPDOC-01If you have completed a SOC 2 audit, does it include the Privacy Trust Service Principle?This is specifically asking for the Privacy Trust Service Principle, which is not always included in a SOC 2 audit.PDOC-02Do you conform with a specific industry-standard privacy framework (e.g., NIST Privacy Framework, GDPR, ISO 27701)?Conformance with industry privacy frameworks can demonstrate an organization's privacy posture and can provide clients a sense of comfort as to the organization's commitment to protection of personal data.If the organization relies on more than one framework or only on portions of a framework, has this been mapped to the Security Controls Framework? If so, please provide a copy of the mapping used.PDOC-03Does your employee onboarding and offboarding policy include training of employees on information security and data privacy?It is important that new employees be informed of organizational and individual expectations, obligations, and processes for protecting the privacy of personal data entrusted to your organization. It is equally important to ensure departing employees are informed of expectations and their obligations to maintain protection and privacy of personal data they may have been privy to in the course of their employment with your organization.If training is provided to specific employee groups only, please provide information as to which groups and an overview of the training for each group.Privacy of Third PartiesReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesEnd Table Data PTHP-01Do you have contractual agreements with third parties that require them to maintain standards and to comply with all regulatory requirements?*Inclusion of language in contractual agreements ensures third parties are aware of and have agreed to their obligations to maintain standards and comply with all regulatory requirements in regards to protection of personal data they handle on behalf of the organization.PTHP-02Do you perform privacy impact assessments of third parties that collect, process, or have access to personal data to ensure they meet industry and regulatory standards and to mitigate harmful, unethical, or discriminatory impacts on data subjects?The organization providing a product or service cannot reasonably claim it appropriately protects privacy of information entrusted to it if it relies on third parties or subprocessors that do not likewise meet or exceed the claimed levels of protection.If answer is "YES"...
Provide a list of third parties that were subject to a privacy impact assessment, the jurisdiction within which they operate, and the corresponding industry and regulatory standards for each.

If answer is "NO"...
If there are no plans to perform data privacy assessments of third parties, please explain any compensating measures or controls your organization relies on to ensure the privacy and security of client personal data entrusted to your organization.Privacy Change ManagementReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPCHG-01Does your change management process include privacy review and approval?It is important that change management not overlook any privacy considerations.If the answer is yes, describe the process; if the answer is no, describe plans to implement.PCHG-02Do you have policy and procedure, currently implemented, guiding how privacy risks are mitigated until they can be resolved?It is important to have a procedure in place to mitigate privacy risks as they come up.If the answer is yes, describe the process; if the answer is no, describe plans to implement.Privacy of Sensitive DataReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPDAT-01Do you collect, process, or store demographic information?*This data can be included in data sets that are deidentified but is sensitive data that could be reidentified if paired with other data points.Because of the nature of such data, it is important to have a full understanding of how the data is used and protected.PDAT-02Do you capture or create genetic, biometric, or behaviometric information (e.g., facial recognition or fingerprints)?*This data can be included in data sets that are deidentified but is sensitive data that could be reidentified if paired with other data points.Because of the nature of such data, it is important to have a full understanding of how the data is used and protected.PDAT-03Do you combine institutional data (including "de-identified," "anonymized," or otherwise masked data) with personal data from any other sources?*To identify potential re-identification risks and ensure the vendor doesn't merge institutional data with external datasets in ways that could compromise privacy protections or violate data use restrictions.If yes, describe what types of external data sources are combined with institutional data and for what purposes.PDAT-04Is institutional data coming into or going out of the United States at any point during collection, processing, storage, or archiving?To assess cross-border data transfer risks and ensure compliance with international privacy regulations including GDPR, data localization requirements, and data sovereignty considerations.If yes, identify which countries data flows to/from and what safeguards are in place (e.g., Standard Contractual Clauses, adequacy decisions).PDAT-05Do you capture device information (e.g., IP address, MAC address)?This question can clarify whether there are any indirect identifiers that don't appear to be readily identifiable but that could be identifiable in the event of unauthorized access or use.PDAT-06Does any part of this service/project involve a web/app tracking component (e.g., use of web-tracking pixels, cookies)?Web tracking can be used to identify users via their IP address, login information, browser information, etc.End Table Data PDAT-07Does your staff (or a third party) have access to institutional data (e.g., financial, PHI, or other sensitive information) through any means?Institutional data may be sensitive in nature and should only be accessed for legitimate business purposes.PDAT-08Will you handle personal data in a manner compliant with all relevant laws, regulations, and applicable institution policies?Personal data that is handled improperly or against law/regulation can have significant negative impact.Privacy Policies and ProceduresReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesPRPO-01Do you have a documented privacy management process?It's important for customers to know their data will remain private after being shared with the vendor.Are your internal privacy practices and obligations documented in internal corporate privacy policy/policies? Does the internal privacy policy explain your organization's policies and practices regarding collection of personal information and other data about individuals?PRPO-02Are privacy principles designed into the product lifecycle (i.e., privacy-by-design)?Building privacy principles into the product lifecycle (e.g., privacy-by-design) can help ease the privacy management process.PRPO-03Will you comply with applicable breach notification laws?It's very important to get out in front of the impact from a system breach. Once a breach has been confirmed, timely communication is imperative.This is usually dictated by the government agency for the geographic region and, possibly, by your cybersecurity insurance carrier.End Table Data PRPO-04Will you comply with the institution's policies regarding user privacy and data protection?This question can help gauge a solution provider's willingness to align with institutional data privacy and protection policies before the contracting stage.Do any parts of your institutional policy conflict with the solution provider's standard practices?PRPO-05Is your company subject to the laws and regulations of the institution's geographic region?This question identifies whether the institution and solution provider are beholden to the same laws. If not, this should be covered in the contract.Which laws apply to your operations in institution's region? Where is institutional data processed or stored? Provide a link or document summarizing your compliance stance.PRPO-06Do you have a privacy awareness/training program?*Privacy awareness/training refers to the ongoing education provided to individuals who handle sensitive data to ensure they understand privacy obligations, data protection principles, and regulatory requirements (e.g., FERPA, HIPAA, GDPR). This training helps reduce the risk of accidental data exposure and reinforces responsible data stewardship.PRPO-07Is privacy awareness training mandatory for all employees?This question serves a critical purpose in evaluating a vendor or institution's commitment to data protection, risk mitigation, and regulatory compliance.This question helps assess whether privacy is treated as an organizational responsibility and whether the institution enforces consistent practices to reduce human risk factors.PRPO-08Is AI privacy and ethics awareness/training required for all employees who work with AI?This question is intended to assess whether an institution or vendor is proactively managing the risks, responsibilities, and ethical implications of AI use, especially as it relates to sensitive data, autonomy, and fairness.This question helps assess institutional maturity in governing responsible AI use, particularly as privacy and fairness concerns rise with increased automation and data use. Clarifying the structure and enforcement of training supports transparency and accountability in AI-related operations.PRPO-09Do you have any decision-making processes that are completely automated (i.e., there is no human involvement)?This question identifies potential privacy, ethical, security, and compliance risks that may arise from fully automated systems, especially those that affect individuals or their data.This question evaluates risk exposure and ethical considerations surrounding automated processes, especially those that affect access, compliance, or personal data rights. Transparency about the scope, oversight, and redress options for automated decision-making is critical to maintaining trust and regulatory alignment.End Table Data PRPO-10Do you have a documented process for managing automated processing, including validations, monitoring, and data subject requests?This question assesses the maturity of your automation governance. Documented procedures help ensure that automated systems are accountable, reliable, and capable of respecting individual rights. Lack of documentation may indicate unmanaged risks, especially in environments handling sensitive or regulated data.PRPO-11Do you have a documented policy for sharing information with law enforcement?The institution should know which laws apply to the data to which the solution provider will have access. You should also have a thorough understanding of how requests from law enforcement will be handled.PRPO-12Do you share any institutional data with law enforcement without a valid warrant or subpoena?*To protect institutional and individual privacy rights by ensuring data is only disclosed to law enforcement through proper legal channels with appropriate due process protections.If yes, under what circumstances and with what documentation/notification to the institution?PRPO-13Does your incident response team include a privacy analyst/officer?Having a privacy analyst/officer on an incident response team can help the company more quickly identify a breach and comply with applicable notification laws.International PrivacyReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesINTL-01Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in the European Economic Area (EEA)?Understanding whether the vendor processes data in Europe may help with institutional GDPR compliance.If institution's intended use includes targeting of data subjects in EEA/UK and if vendor marks "no," institution might want to follow up to clarify data collected.End Table Data INTL-02Do you have a data protection officer (DPO)?Vendors targeting services in the EEA/UK should have GDPR-compliant policies and procedures.INTL-03Will you sign appropriate GDPR Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs) with the institution?Vendors targeting services in the EEA/UK should have the ability to agree to the SCCs.INTL-04Will data be collected from or processed in or stored in China?Understanding whether the vendor processes data in China may help with institutional PIPL compliance.If institution's intended use includes targeting of data subjects in China and if vendor marks "no," institution might want to follow up to clarify data collected.INTL-05Do you comply with PIPL security, privacy, and data localization requirements?Vendors targeting services in China should have the ability to comply with PIPL requirements.Data PrivacyReason for QuestionFollow-Up Inquiries/ResponsesDRPV-01Have you performed a Data Privacy Impact Assessment for the solution/project?To verify the vendor has systematically evaluated privacy risks and implemented appropriate safeguards before deploying their solution, demonstrating privacy-by-design principles.Please provide a copy of the DPIA or summary of findings and mitigation measures.DRPV-02Do you provide an end-user privacy notice about privacy policies and procedures that identify the purpose(s) for which personal information is collected, used, retained, and disclosed?To ensure transparency with end users about data practices and compliance with privacy notice requirements under FERPA, GDPR, CCPA, and other applicable regulations.How do you inform users of changes to the policy?DRPV-03Do you describe the choices available to the individual and obtain implicit or explicit consent with respect to the collection, use, and disclosure of personal information?To verify meaningful consent mechanisms exist and users have adequate control over their personal information in accordance with fair information practice principles and regulatory requirements.Describe your consent mechanism and how users can withdraw consent if they choose.DRPV-04Do you collect personal information only for the purpose(s) identified in the agreement with an institution or, if there is none, the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice?Companies may collect information for purposes not outlined in the service agreement, including quality assurance, marketing, etc. Institutions should have a thorough understanding of what data is being used and how.End Table Data DRPV-05Do you have a documented list of personal data your service maintains?To ensure the vendor maintains data inventory records necessary for privacy compliance, breach response, data subject rights requests, and understanding the full scope of data collection.Please provide your data inventory or map showing categories of personal data collected and retention periods.DRPV-06Do you retain personal information for only as long as necessary to fulfill the stated purpose(s) or as required by law or regulation and thereafter appropriately dispose of such information?Data minimization is a basic privacy principle, and it is important to know whether the solution provider is keeping data longer than necessary and introducing a significant privacy risk.DRPV-07Do you provide individuals with access to their personal information for review and update (i.e., data subject rights)?This question seeks proof of an entity's ability to honor data-subject rights related to providing an individual access to their own information. Such processes would include descriptions of request processes individuals can follow to review their information and written processes a data subject may use to ask for changes or corrections to data held about them.DRPV-08Do you disclose personal information to third parties only for the purpose(s) identified in the privacy notice or with the implicit or explicit consent of the individual?To limit unauthorized third-party data sharing and ensure transparency about data flows beyond the direct vendor relationship, protecting against unexpected secondary uses.Provide a list of third parties who receive personal information and the purpose for each disclosure.DRPV-09Do you protect personal information against unauthorized access (both physical and logical)?To verify appropriate security controls are in place to protect personal data from breaches, unauthorized disclosure, and both external and internal threats.Describe your access control mechanisms, encryption methods, and incident response procedures.DRPV-10Do you maintain accurate, complete, and relevant personal information for the purposes identified in the privacy notice?To ensure data quality practices that prevent privacy harms from inaccurate or outdated personal information, particularly in contexts where data accuracy affects individual rights or opportunities.What processes do you have for individuals to review and correct their personal information?DRPV-11Do you have procedures to address privacy-related noncompliance complaints and disputes?To verify accountability mechanisms exist for addressing privacy concerns, providing recourse to affected individuals, and demonstrating responsiveness to privacy complaints.Describe your complaint handling process, typical response times, and escalation procedures.End Table Data DRPV-12Do you "anonymize," "de-identify," or otherwise mask personal data?To understand the vendor's approach to privacy-enhancing techniques and assess whether data masking methods are appropriate, effective, and aligned with recognized anonymization standards.Describe your anonymization methodology and any validation or testing performed to ensure re-identification risks are minimized.DRPV-13Do you or your subprocessors use or disclose "anonymized," "de-identified," or otherwise masked data for any purpose other than those identified in the agreement with an institution (e.g., sharing with ad networks or data brokers, marketing, creation of profiles, analytics unrelated to services provided to institution)?To prevent secondary use of institutional data that could undermine privacy protections, contradict institutional data governance policies, or enable commercial uses incompatible with educational purposes.If yes, provide details on secondary uses and obtain specific written consent from the institution for these uses.DRPV-14Do you certify stop-processing requests, including any data that is processed by a third party on your behalf?It is helpful to understand a vendor or third party's actions with data they receive or create, which might include your organization's constituent data. Good practices include abiding by a requirement to delete or stop processing an individual's data upon request. Check your state's law to see what that requirement might be: https://iapp.org/resources/article/us-state-privacy-legislation-tracker/If your organization has exchange programs or does business with global organizations or organizations located outside the United States, depending on the services sought, your institution should determine whether this is a requirement.DRPV-15Do you have a process to review code for ethical considerations?AI and other software developers increasingly ingest confidential datasets to use for output. Understanding the ethics, transparency, and other such considerations that went into the product help the purchasing organization see the position of the vendor and its etiquette toward privacy.
