The ict



OppOrtunity



for a



Disability-inclusive



DevelOpment



framework





Disclaimer All rights are reserved. No part of this publi- cation may be reproduced, by any means



tion was provided by authors of and contrib- ization of the previously mentioned organ- izations. Denominations and classifica- utors to the case study, and does not neces- The information contained in this publica- whatsoever, without a prior written author-



sarily represent views of the Broadband any opinion concerning the legal or other tions used in this publication do not imply

Commission for Digital Development, G3ict, status of any territory or any endorsement

IDA, ITU, Microsoft, the Telecentre.org or acceptance of any boundary. Where the

Foundation or UNESCO, their membership designation “country” appears in this publi-

and/or staff. cation, it covers countries and territories.



The ict





OppOrtunity



for a



Disability-inclusive



DevelOpment



framework



Synthesis report of the ICT Consultation in support of

the High-Level Meeting on Disability and Development of

the sixty-eighth session of the United Nations General Assembly



September 2013





vi




FOreWOrD



tHe ict OppOrtunity FOr Disability-inclusive

DevelOpment: WHy nOW?



The High-Level Meeting on Disability and Convention must be implemented and the post-

Development of the sixty-eighth session of the 2015 development agenda should reflect its guide-

United Nations General Assembly will be a key lines on accessibility to ensure the social and

milestone in securing the role of persons with economic inclusion of this important group of

disabilities in the process that will define the the global population. post-2015 development agenda. This opportu-

nity cannot be missed. With one billion persons Among those accessibility issues, removing

living with disabilities, 80% of those in develop- barriers to accessing Information and Commu-

ing nations, a sound global development agenda nication Technologies (ICTs) by persons with

cannot ignore disabilities, a key driver of exclu- disabilities is of paramount importance. In

sion and poverty. today’s world, with the ubiquitous impact of ICTs

across all sectors of activities in all countries,

Fortunately, the remarkable rate of adoption by no one should be excluded from using mobile

Member States of the United Nations Conven- phones, the Internet, televisions, computers,

tion on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities electronic kiosks and their myriad of applica-

since 2007 demonstrates a strong universal tions and services including in education, polit-

support for a disability-inclusive agenda among ical life, and cultural activities or for e-govern-

Member States. In effect, the Convention is ment or e-health to cite a few examples. Being

not only a Human Rights treaty, the first of excluded from these ICT-enabled applications

this millennium, but also a blueprint for sound implies being shut down not only from the infor-

development policies and programs to ensure mation society, but also from accessing essential

the full participation of person with disabilities public services, as well as from the opportunity

in all aspects of society. The dispositions of the of living an independent life.





vii




In this context we can say without any hesita- the world, has identified the key priorities that

tion that ensuring accessible ICTs for persons should be taken into account in the coming

with disabilities and expanding access to these years to maximize the contribution of ICTs

technologies, as well as to assistive technologies, to enable the social and economic inclusion of

should become a key element of global, regional persons with disabilities. I invite all relevant

and national strategies to remove the remain- stakeholders to go through these findings and

ing barriers faced by persons with disabilities. to be involved in the implementation of the

In other words, ICT must be an integral part of a recommendations proposed as a way forward in

disability-inclusive development agenda. this report.



This is the main message that results from We cannot miss the opportunity to use all

the ICT sector consultation in support of the available tools – including ICTs – to build an

High-Level Meeting, a joint initiative of the inclusive society for persons with disabilities.

Broadband Commission, G3ict, IDA, ITU, By working together across all sectors of society

Microsoft, the Telecentre.org Foundation – public, private and civil society – we can finally

and UNESCO. The consultation, which has ensure the inclusion of one billion persons with

mobilized relevant expert views from around disabilities in the digital age.



By H.E. Ambassador Luis Gallegos

Ambassador Luis Gallegos is the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the United Nations Office at Geneva. He was unanimously elected by his peers to serve as Vice President and Rapporteur of the United Nations Human Rights Council for 2013. He is Chairman of the Global UN Partnership for Inclusive Information and Communication Technologies and member of the International Board of Directors of the Special Olympics. From 2002 to 2005, he served as the Chairperson of the United Nations Ad Hoc Committee on the Comprehen-sive and Integral International Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities. The Congress of Ecuador has honored him twice for his work in human rights and for his leadership in the promotion and protection of human rights of persons with disabilities. Ambassador Gallegos has received numerous honorary decora-tions and awards, among which is the Justice for All Disabilities Rights Award.





viii




preFace



More than a billion people live with some form aspects of development. Furthermore, the UN

of disability, and 80% of them live in developing General Assembly has undertaken to address

countries. Disability is both a cause and a conse- this issue, and, during its sixty-eighth session,

quence of poverty: poor people are more likely will be discussing the inclusion and integra-

to become disabled, and people with disabili- tion of the rights, well-being and perspective of

ties are among the poorest and most vulnerable persons with disabilities in post-2015 develop-

groups of the global population. ment efforts at the national, regional and inter-

national levels.

Regrettably, disability was not included in the



their operationalizing targets and indicators. As lation of a post-2015 development agenda, the a result, disability has largely been invisible in Broadband Commission for Digital Develop- Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) or in To contribute to efforts leading to the formu-

their implementation, and is rarely included in

ment, the Global Initiative for Inclusive Infor-

national policies, programmes, or in monitor-

mation and Communication Technologies

ing and evaluation efforts related to the MDGs,.

(G3ict), the International Disability Alliance

ronmental barriers are still preventing persons (IDA), the International Telecommunication This has perpetuated a situation in which envi-

with disabilities from accessing, participating Union (ITU), Microsoft, the Telecentre.org

and being fully-included in social, economic Foundation and the United Nations Educational,

and political activities. Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)

have jointly produced this ICT Opportunity for

The Convention on the Rights of Persons with a Disability-Inclusive Development Framework.

Disabilities, which entered into force in 2008, This multi-stakeholder partnership adopted a

constitutes a commitment of the international participatory approach and carried out a global

community to the inclusion of the disability consultation to collect over 150 expert inputs

perspective and persons with disabilities in all from 55 countries across the world.





ix




The ICT Opportunity for a Disability-Inclu- indicators to monitor progress towards the

sive Development Framework contributes to achievement of a disability-inclusive develop-

a better understanding of the extent to which ment agenda. information and communication technolo-

gies (ICTs) enable and accelerate the social Our vision is of inclusive development and a

and economic inclusion of persons with disa- society in which persons with disabilities, as

bilities. It highlights that when ICTs are both agents and beneficiaries of develop-

available, affordable and accessible, they ment efforts, can maximize the use of ICTs

significantly improve access to all aspects of to fully access healthcare serv ices, benefit at

society and development. It also lists challenges all educational levels, be competitive in the

that are still to be addressed while outlin- labour market, participate in public life and

ing concrete actions to be undertaken by each live independently. We invite you to maximize

group of stake holders - including national your use of the evidence in this report and we

governments, the private sector, and civil and look forward to working together towards the

international organizations - and relevant achievement of this vision.





Dr Hamadoun I. Touré Irina Bokova



Secretary-General Director-General

ITU UNESCO





Axel Leblois Yannis Vardakastanis David Tennenhouse Miguel Raimilla President & Executive Chair Corporate Vice President, Executive Director Director Technology Policy



G3ict International Disability Alliance Microsoft Telecentre.org Foundation





xi




acknOWleDgements



This report has been prepared by the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, G3ict, IDA, ITU, Microsoft, the Telecentre.org Foundation or UNESCO [*]. The content is based on the information gathered during the ICT consultation in support of the HLMDD.



[*] The team involved in the preparation of the report study included the following experts and staff from the partners of the consultation (listed alphabetically by organization):



G3ict Axel Leblois.



IDA Kevin Carey (World Blind Union), Rodolfo Cattani (European

Disability Forum), Latoa Halatau (Pacific Disability Forum), Shilpi Kapoor and Priti Rohra (Disabled Peoples International) and Ellen Walker (IDA Secretariat).



ITU Denis Andreev, Simao Campos, Jose Maria Diaz Batanero, Simon

De Nicola, Gary Fowlie, Alexandra Gaspari, Amal Kharbichi, Junko Koizumi, Tomas Lamanauskas, Malcolm Johnson, Raquel Mendes, Ahone Njume-Ebong, Gaëtan Noverraz, Rachel Powers, Susan Schorr, Roxana Widmer-Iliescu, Houlin Zhao and Phillippa Biggs.



Microsoft Paul Mitchell and James Thurston.



Telecentre.org Maria Josefina Echeverria, Nabil Eid, Laia Fauró, Vida Gabe, Maria

Foundation Liliana Mor and Miguel Raimilla.



UNESCO Irmgarda Kasinskaite-Buddeberg, Suzanne Bilello, Andrea Cairola,

Florence Migeon, Mariana Kitsiona, George Award and Zineb Mekouar.



Sincere thanks are expressed to all the organizations (see Annex I) that submitted their views to the consultation for their written inputs to the consultation.

cOntent



Foreword vi

Preface viii

Acknowledgements xi

1. Introduction 2

2. The ICT opportunity for persons with disabilities 6

Websites: critical facilitators for accessing social and economic activities 8

Mobile device and services: vital enablers for independent living 11

Radio and TV set and services: continuously contributing to social inclusion 12

Best practices 14

3. Understanding the challenges 18

Pervasive barriers 18

Barriers related to specific areas of development 22

Additional challenges to be considered 30

4. The way forward 34

The role of governments 36

The United Nations system and other international organizations 40

The role of private sector 44

The role of civil society and organizations of persons with disabilities 46

5. A proposal of indicators for measuring progress 48

Endnotes 52

Annex 1: List of organizations involved 56

About 62





intrODuctiOn




1.



Including persons with disabilities in all aspects implementation, putting special emphasis on

of society is one of the remaining challenges of including specific references, actions and goals

the global development agenda. The widespread aimed at further integrating persons with disa-

adoption of the United Nations Conventioni bilities into the new international development

on the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities agenda. This new framework will come into

(UNCRPD) in 2006 heralded a major step force after 2015, the deadline established for the

forward in advancing the inclusion of persons achievement of the Millennium Development

with disabilities, turning their socio-economic Goals (MDGs). exclusion into a human rights issue. The

UNCRPD places significant obligations on all In this context, the use of Information and

state officials responsible for equal access to Communication Technologies (ICTs) allow

education and employment opportunities. With the removal of many of the remaining barriers

155 signatoriesii and 130 ratificationsiii to faced by persons with disabilities. With ICTs

the UNCRPD, the Convention is on its way to increasingly integrated into every aspect of the

becoming a truly universal framework for modern world, these ubiquitous technologies

policy, legislation and regulation champi- have become a positive force of transformation

oning the rights of persons with disabilities. and a crucial element of any personal develop-

As this process continues, all stakeholders ment/empowerment and institutional frame-

are focusing their attention on advancing its work for inclusive development. ICTs are





3




already providing access to key public services, This report is the result of an extensive expert

with widespread implications for social progress consultation organized and conducted from 20

and economic growth aimed at eradicating May to 17 June 2013. The consultation gathered

poverty and promoting inclusive societies and over 150 expert inputs from relevant organiza-

sustainable development. Accessible ICTs have tions (see Annex I) and key individuals repre-

the potential to provide persons with disabil- senting multiple categories of stakeholders,

ities unprecedented levels of access to educa- including governments, academic institutions,

tion, skills training and employment, as well as organizations of persons with disabilities,

the opportunity to participate in the economic, civil society organizations, the private sector

cultural and social life of their communitiesiv. and regional and international organizations.

As of April 2013 and considering that 15 per cent Furthermore, these inputs stemmed from over

of the world’s population, one billion people, has 55 countries on the 6 major continents, encom-

a disability that affects their access to modern passing diverse areas of development. More infor-

communications, there is a dire need to improve mation about the consultation is available at:

the access to ICTs for persons with disabilities www.itu.int/accessibility (ITUv and G3ict, 2012)vi .





4




This report aims to complement previous Based on the synthesis of the expert views gath-

work on the use of ICT as an enabler of the ered throughout the consultation, Section 2

economic, social and political inclusion of presents the extent to which ICTs are enablers

persons with disabilities by further study- of social progress and economic growth along

ing the specific contribution that ICTs can with noteworthy best practices in this field.



opment agenda, challenges to be overcome opment efforts in the areas of health, education, employment, independent living, government and actions to be undertaken. It synthesizes a bring to achieve a disability-inclusive devel- Section 3 analyses the barriers that affect devel-



descriptive data analysis conducted following life. Section 4 presents a proposed roadmap services and participation in political and public

the collection of survey responsesvii and inter- to move the ICT accessibility agenda forward

views of prominent experts in the fields of ICT, compiling a set of priority actions to be under-

disability and development. It also includes taken by each category of stakeholders. Finally,

comments and suggestions received from the section 5 lists a set of indicators for measuring

peer-review process carried out from 26 July progress towards a disability-inclusive economic

to 21 August 2013. and social development.





tHe ict




OppOrtunity



FOr persOns



WitH



Disabilities



2.



While there are several definitionsviii of ICT, The ICT opportunity for persons with disabil-

all acknowledge that ICT is an umbrella term ities can be better assessed by analysing how

which includes any information and communi- each type of access technology contributes to

cation device or application and its content. Such the different dimensions involved in the social

a definition encompasses a wide range of access and economic inclusion of persons with disabil-

technologies, such as radio, television, satellites, ities. Following this approach, figure 1 presents mobile phones, fixed lines, computers, network a synthesis of the expert views gathered in the

hardware and software. The importance of ICT consultationix. ICTs lies in their ability to open up a wide range

of services, transform existing services and Overall, web services (and the devices used to

create greater demand for access to informa- access them) constitute the access technol-

tion and knowledge, particularly in underserved ogy with the greatest impact in promoting the

and excluded populations, such as persons inclusion of persons with disabilities, based on

with disabilities. the survey data. This contribution is closely





7




Figure 1 : Expert assessment of the contribution of ICTs to improving persons with disabilities’ access to social and economic activities



4.0-5.0 : To a large extent

3.0-3.9 : To a moderate extent Mobile Traditional Other & ICTs most 1.0-1.9 : device & TV set Traditional emerging impactful 2.0-2.9 : To some extent

To little extent

0.0-0.9 : Not at all Websites services & services Radio technologies where?

Healthcare 3.3 3.1 2.9 2.5 2.7 2.9

Primary education 3.0 2.6 2.8 2.3 2.9 2.7

Secondary education 3.4 3.0 2.7 2.3 2.8 2.8

Tertiary, professional, 3.7 3.4 2.9 2.4 2.8 3.0

lifelong education

Employment 3.7 3.3 2.5 2.2 2.7 2.8

Independent living 3.4 4.6 2.8 2.4 2.8 3.2

Government services 3.5 3.0 3.0 2.3 2.6 2.8

Participation in political 3.3 3.1 2.7 2.5 2.6 2.8

& public life

Overall average 3.4 3.2 2.7 2.3 2.7



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



followed by mobile phones, which, despite being use as a tool to access government services

one of the newer technologies from the ICTs and information. assessed, constitute the second-most valued

ICT with regards to its contribution for persons The following section presents best practices

with disabilities. In particular, the use of mobile in the use of each of these technologies to

phones is instrumental in allowing the inde- promote the economic and social inclusion

pendent living of persons with disabilities. Tele- of persons with disabilities. These best prac-

vision sets and services are the third-ranked tices were highlighted by the experts engaged

ICT in the assessment, specifically for their throughout the consultation process.





8




http://



WEBsITEs: critical facilitators for access- audio and text communication, cloud-based

ing social and economic activities sharing and media interaction. For persons with

The advent of the Internet has heralded a new disabilities, these services and content are made

age not only of information sharing in general, further accessible through both computer-based

but of the proliferation of web-based services and web-based accessibility applications such

that serve disabled and non-disabled commu- as screen readers, speech recognition, video

nities alike. Through the Internet, users can communication (for sign language communica-

remotely participate in a range of activities such tion and video relay interpretation), voice to text

as tertiary, professional, lifelong education, services (open and closed captioning, both real-

employment, economic, government services time and embedded) and visual assistance. and consumer activities. Opportunities for

social participation also include social network- In addition, the move to cloud computing and the

ing, news access, online interest groups, video, benefits gained from its processing capability





9




“The Internet has acted as a platform for collaboration for

all types of organisations. It has allowed for all citizens,

including people with disabilities, to engage more actively

in political and social life. The Internet in itself could be

considered an assistive technology, allowing voices to be

heard that traditionally could not be.”

Anriette Esterhuysen, Executive Director, Association for Progressive Communications (APC)



for performing complex operations will likely help streamline services and move the status

result in substantial improvements in the quality quo away from dependence on single-func-

and availability of accessible ICTs. However, it tion, cost-prohibitive and often non-accessible

should be noted that access to the cloud via the devices. In fact, websites and web applications

Internet is a prerequisite for these technologies have a greater impact in improving persons with

to become available and mainstream. disabilities’ access to socio-cultural, educational

and economic activities than any other ICT

Websites can provide visual, audio and text with the exception of mobile phones’ impact on

output on demand and offer multimedia input independent living. It is important to recognize

opportunities to users, making traditional that accessibility of websites is enabled by the

uni-functional radio and schedule-driven combination of accessibility technologies in

traditional TV broadcasting technologies the PCs and devices used to access them as well

increasingly irrelevant. For persons with disa- as the accessible design and planning that goes

bilities, multi-functional online environments into the development of websites themselves.





10




Figure 2 : “access tO icts Has been vital FOr me tO

acHieve Full participatiOn in all aspects OF liFe

anD sOciety. “



Without access to ICTs, which include assistive technologies or specially-developed ICTs,

people with disabilities are disenfranchised and are denied equal access to education, culture,

and everyday services. This ends up restricting their job opportunities and their possibility for

independent living. As a blind person myself, using ICTs is what enabled me to finish my school

and university education and complete my academic training, master’s degree and internships.



Access to ICTs has been vital for me to achieve full participation in all aspects of life and society,

and will continue to be so for the rest of my life. I frequently use the Internet and digital librar-

ies, and can access information about basic things for independent daily living, such as public

health information. ICTs have enabled me to access books for pleasure and for education, and I

benefit from audio-description to enjoy culture through cinema, museums and documentaries.



ICTs help me use my bank account through ATMs, find my way around cities on my own guided

by maps and GPS, accessing crucial information such as public transport routes and timetables.

Through ICTs I benefit from e-government services and regularly make electronic payments.

ICTs also make it possible for me to communicate on an equal basis with others.



If you cannot access education, you cannot get access to the labour market and you cannot

achieve independent living. Although my academic background provided me with the knowl-

edge and skills necessary for exciting career possibilities that would not have been possible

without proper access to ICTs either through universal design or through assistive technology.

Therefore, ICTs are the key that opens the door to full participation for people with disabilities.



Lucía Ramón Torres is a Mexican lawyer. She works as an advisor for the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the

UN and other International Organizations in Geneva





11




MOBILE dEvICEs And sErvICEs: vital cognitive needs of customers with disabilities.

enablers for independent living A variety of smartphones are rated for hearing

More than any other ICTs in use today, mobile aid compatibility. Customers can enjoy open or

devices and services have by far the greatest closed-captioned multimedia content and use



disabilities. At the basic level, feature phones video relay services to communicate via sign provide a means of on-demand communication language. They are also able to access content impact on independent living for persons with face-to-face video chat applications or dedicated

for the user through both SMS and voice calls.

non-visually through screen reading applica-



by ensuring that emergency services, family tions, customize alert settings to use a combi- This in itself can enable independent living

members, personal aides, assistive and everyday nation of audible, visual and vibration alerts and

services are just a call or text away. take advantage of voice-commands, adjustable

font sizes, predictive text and a range of other

At a more sophisticated level, smartphones innovative features, accessories, and third-

address the unique sensory, physical and party applications.





12




Furthermore, mobile devices are designed easily-customizable systems for a fraction of

to be portable and are easily worn or carried the cost of a new computer. Increasingly, these

by a user, unlike a laptop computer or televi- devices are appearing on the market with acces-

sion set. For persons with disabilities, having sibility systems built-in. The prevalence of free

a mobile device increases independent living applications on the most popular apps markets

not only because of the wide range of services also enable low- to no-cost software options for

that can be accessed, but also because this assistive and other services. type of device allows access to those services

(including emergency services) immedi- rAdIO And Tv sET And sErvICEs: con-

ately at the time of need and from anywhere tinuously contributing to social inclusion

in the network. Because both websites and mobile devices

have experienced a gigantic boom in popular-

Device and software cost is a huge consider- ity and prevalence over the past two decades,

ation when it comes to access to ICTs. While it is expected that they would be perceived by

complex, function-specific devices may be all sectors of the population as more impact-

cost-prohibitive for many persons with disa- ful for social and economic participation than

bilities, operator-subsidized smartphones some of the more longstanding ICTs. However,

and tablets offer high-quality, portable, the consultation also highlighted the key





13




contribution that “older” ICTs, in particular this is the integration of sign language inter-

radio and TV services, still enable the social pretation or voice over audio channels in

inclusion of persons with disabilities. This is the signals broadcasted, allowing users to opt-in

the case of traditional radio, which has long for these services at any time. been an indispensable means for persons

with sight disabilities to access informa- With the transition to IP networks these

tion. In today’s digital age, digital radio television services are being challenged by



tial to maintain the relevance of radio for on-demand news coverage, which are quickly persons with disabilities. becoming ubiquitous. Technologies enabling broadcast services still have a great poten- Internet-streamed radio and video and also

As far as traditional television sets and broad- interactivity and enriched services, for example

casting services are concerned, these technol- those based on IPTV standards such as the

ogies continue providing visual, audio and text ones developed within ITU, are enabling

output through closed captioning. The intro- innovative television sets and broadcast-

duction of digital TV is expanding the range of ing services that provide total communication

features and functions that can be enabled for to the public in general and to persons with

persons with disabilities. One recent example of disabilities, in particular.





14




BEsT prACTICEs

One of the most important developments for Furthermore, standardization is a key vehicle

utilization of ICTs by persons with disabilities to develop global telecommunications and ICT

is the definition and implementation of accessi- standards that include accessibility features.

bility guidelines to ensure ease of use by persons In this regard, an important goal of stand-

with disabilities. For instance, the introduction ardization-related activities is to ensure that

of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelinesx newly developed standards contain the neces-

(WCAG) and the new ISO/IEC standard for sary elements that make services and features

WCAG 2.0 – ISO/IEC 40500:2012xi are some of usable by people with as broad a range of capa-

the best practices on how to mainstream acces- bilities as possible. As standards describe how

sibility principles in the case of web content. different types of equipment interact with

Implementation of these guidelines is already each other and define the quality necessary

reducing and removing significant accessibil- for media to be usable by all devices, these stand-

ity barriers precisely in the ICT service that ards should also describe suitable methods

was highlighted during the consultation as the of media delivery to persons with disabilities,

most relevant for persons with disabilities, the and are therefore essential for the provision

Internet. In addition, empirical evidence shows of services accessible for all persons,

that the adoption of these guidelines improves regardless of ability. In this line of thought,

user experience and accessibility for all persons, ITUxii has developed a set of accessibility regardless of disability. This fact – that invest- guidelinesxiii to assist standards writers in ments in accessibility also introduce benefits for making equipment, systems and services acces-

wider groups of the population – is a common and sible from day one. hugely significant finding.





15




Figure 3 : emerging icts, enabling persOns WitH Disabilities at HOme anD aWay



In addition to already-existing interactive and accessible services provided by new technologies such as standards-based IPTV, a new development in broadcasting will make access services available via Integrated Broadcast-Broadband (IBB) systems. As with IPTV, IBB content delivery via broadband telecommunication networks allows the representation of access service exactly according to the needs of the persons with disabilities without causing any disturbance to those that do not need these services. In this case, the access services can be displayed (video, images, sound, text, graphics and data) either on the main screen (or the main loudspeakers) or on a second screen (normally a type of tablet PC). By means of the second screen, persons with disabilities are individually served even when watching TV together with their friends or their family.



Excerpt of the contribution from International Telecommunication Unionxiv , ITU-R Study Group 6 - Broadcasting service



Satellite networks/applications in the mobile-satellite service (MSS) can help to remove barriers and promote full participation/socio-economic inclusion of persons with disabilities. This particular case of a deaf person sailing single-handedly round the globe, a world first, while staying connected throughout his eight-month challenge via the Inmarsat network, brilliantly shows that satellite services can assist persons with disabilities to be really and fully included in our contemporary world, even under the most extreme conditions.



Link to story: www.satnews.com/story.php?number=1596483898



Excerpt of the Contribution from International Telecommunication Union, ITU-R Study Group 4 - Satellite services





16




“Access to a computer is one of the greatest equalizers

for people with disabilities. The ability to operate a

computer and even program an application allows an

individual with a disability to find a passion, find a

career and become financially independent.”

John Schimmel, Co-founder, DIY Ability



Also, the implementation of conformance the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), and

and interoperability assessment principles other appropriate forums. These organizations

in the standardization work could guarantee are integral in defining and proliferating techni-

to customers the compatibility of tested ICT cal standards that contribute to mainstreaming

products and their ability to work in differ- accessible ICTs. It is essential that the determi-

ent network environments. For this reason, it nation of how persons with disabilities interact



operability requirements in standards devel- every stage of the process. They must not only opments. This is especially true for upcoming be observed as they interact with ICTs, but in is highly recommended to add relevant inter- with ICTs involve persons with disabilities in

technologies that might be part of ICT products

order for those observations to be meaningful

for persons with disabilities.

they must be included and consulted on how to

To further contribute to the advancement of ICT make the assessments and how to interpret the

accessibility, governments, industry and private results of those assessments. sector organizations, research centres as well as

organizations representing persons with disa- To conclude this section figure 4 highlights

bilities are encouraged to contribute to the work technologies that, in the views of the experts

of international standards organizations such consulted, have proven successful and have

as the ITU’s Standardization sectorxv, the Inter- significantly improved the inclusion of persons

national Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), with disabilities in all aspects of society.





17




Figure 4 : impactFul tecHnOlOgies

• Websites: online educational courses, social networking, shopping



• Captioned telephone (relay) Internet

• Telework: online jobs and training, virtual collaboration • Telemedicine and e-health



• Sign language interpretation over the web (Video Relay Service, Video

Relay Interpreting)

• Chat systems: VoIP, audio, video, text, sign language, text to avatar, real-



time text Software

• Accessibility software: screen reading, voice to text, screen typing



• Captions (closed and open) [eg. Youtube] & apps

• Captioned telephone (relay)

• Accessible e-books and e-documents

• Gamified apps for special education and recreation

• Open source software



• Smartphones and Tablets



• SMS mobile devices

• Emergency service access – voice, text and sign language & services • Captioned telephone (relay)

• Mobile banking services



• Interactive multimedia services and applications TV sets

• Access services: text subtitles (open and closed),, audio subtitles, clear & services audio, descriptive video

• Sign language interpreting



• Hearing Aids

• Smart homes

• Artificial intelligence – robots, digital human modelling, emotion



recognition emerging

• Emergency communication response – satellite,

• “Assistive Bridge to Safety”: emergency call subscriber servicexvi (911, ICTs

112, 000, etc. )

• Speech to text, text to speech, speech/text to sign language • Natural User Interfaces

• Emergency service access – text and sign language relay services

Source: Authors, consultation

unDer-



stanDing



tHe



cHallenges



3.



As outlined in Section 2, the use of ICTs is deeply pErvAsIvE BArrIErs woven into the fabric of society and has become Some barriers are pervasive; they affect all areas

a crucial element of any personal development of development. The first one relates to assistive

/empowerment and institutional framework technologies which are important tools for

for inclusive social progress and economic development efforts. Experts state that the cost growth. However, even with this positive force of assistive technologies, which is comprised of transformation, key challenges remain to of the cost of the technology as well as the cost

be addressed if persons with disabilities are to of assistive technology assessment, training

fully benefit from the use of ICTs. This section and support services, is still a significant barrier

highlights the main barriers and challenges that that prevents persons with disabilities from

persist and must be addressed in expanding fully accessing healthcare services, benefit at all

the ICT opportunity to all persons with disa- educational levels, be competitive on the labour

bilities, as identified by the experts involved in market and live independently. Even when they

the consultation. are free, assistive technologies or embedded





19




Figure 5 : Impact of countries’ income per capita on the availability of Assistive Technologies at major universities



States Parties Level of High Income Upper- Middle Lower-Middle Low-Income UNCRPD ICT Accessibility Income Income

Compliance by Income

per Capita

Assistive Technologies

Available to Persons with

83% 53% 44% 30%

Disabilities at Major

Universities



Source: 2012 UNCRPD ICT Accessibility Progress Report – G3ict



accessibility features in commodity products tenacious barrierxvii to full participation in all might still remain unused if there is a lack of aspects of society. experts and rehabilitation professionals trained

in the use of these technologies and features. Overall, the main challenges to the availa-

bility of assistive technologies are the lack of

As far as the market price of assistive technol- awareness and the lack of effective training,

ogies is concerned, there is a significant price support and a services ecosystem in-country.

variation between sophisticated standalone Typically, there are three channels supporting

condition-specific solutions and user interfaces assistive technologies: i) the education system,

to facilitate the use of commodity ICT products ii) rehabilitation and community centres and

such as phones or PCs with no embedded acces- iii) employment support services. Many coun-

sibility features. When considering that persons tries with low-income per capita have limited or

with disabilities are among the most vulner- non-existent assistive technology programs in

able groups in the world and that 80% of them those three areas. Recent studies show a linear

live in developing countries, it can be argued relationship between the availability of assistive

that the aforementioned challenges related technologies at universities and country income

to the assistive technologies ecosystem are a per capita (G3ict, 2012).





20




“The integration and usage of accessible ICT products

and services, and the reasonable accommodation of the

workplace (including the provision of the necessary

assistive technologies) facilitate the participation of

persons with disabilities in the labour market.”

David Zanoletty, Manager of the ICT and R&D department,

Fundacion ONCE



The lack of access to ICT accessibility tech- accessible ICTs and the lack of effective

nologies remains a significant barrier which implementation of the aforementioned poli-

is observable in all areas of development. Even cies. Only 36 percent of countries have a defi-when ICTs are accessible, they are only availa- nition of accessibility which includes ICT or

ble in a fraction of the thousands of languages electronic media in their laws of regulations

that are spoken and signed all over the world, compliant with the definition of accessibility in

another barrier to be taken into consideration UNCRPD Article 9xviii. In many cases, policies if this challenge is to be addressed effectively. promoting accessibility may be in place but lack

The UNCRPD 2012 ICT Accessibility Progress accompanying laws, legislations and regulations

Report showed that screen readers are avail- to ensure their efficacy. able in the principal language of 63% of the

countries having ratified the UNCRPD and Lastly, limited availability and use of ICTs they are only available in 19% of minority in general greatly constrains the use of such

languages (G3ict, 2012). technologies as a solution to tackling develop-

ment challenges. This barrier exacerbates the

Looking into the issue of inaccessibility, empir- social, educational and economic inequalities

ical evidence shows that this barrier is further for persons with disabilities living in countries

perpetuated by the lack of policies which where the lack of access to ICTs and capacities to

would foster widespread availability of use them is a societal issue.





22




BArrIErs rELATEd TO spECIfIC ArEAs

Of dEvELOpMEnT

Figures 6, 8 and 9 present barriers identified Access to information and knowledge is an

by experts in the context of the consultation essential component of inclusive social and

in the areas of lifelong learning, employment economic development. In this regard, one

and independent livingxix. important barrier highlighted during the

consultation is the lack of competencies of

It should be noted that addressing these school teachers to use ICTs. When teachers

barriers requires a collaboration of main stake- lack the required competencies (which include

holders involved in each sector, as well as the not only ICT command/ knowledge,

definition of cross-sectorial policies and strat- but also skills and positive attitudes towards

egies so that the investments in improving use of ICTs and assistive technology in educa-

access and accessibility of ICTs in one sector tional settings) it is very difficult to use these

can impact positively on other sectors. Section 4 technologies for setting inclusive class-

presents some of the actions highlighted during rooms open to the participation of persons

the consultation that could be undertaken by with disabilities. each group of stakeholders.





23




EnABLInG LIfELOnG LEArnInG Of pErsOns WITH dIsABILITIEs Figure 6 : Main challenges to be addressed for enabling lifelong learning of persons with disabilities



prIMArY EdUCATIOn



Challenges priority

Lack of policy implementation and/or lack of effective implementation mechanisms #1

Limited access to technology #2

Lack of policies which foster widespread availability of accessible ICTs #3



sECOndArY EdUCATIOn



Challenges priority

Cost of assistive technologies #1

Lack of policies which foster widespread availability of accessible ICTs #2

Lack of accessibility of ICT devices #3



TErTIArY, prOfEssIOnAL, LIfELOnG EdUCATIOn



Challenges priority

Cost of assistive technologies #1

Persons with disabilities lack awareness of what ICTs can do to facilitate their socio-

#2

economic inclusion

Lack of policies which foster widespread availability of accessible ICTs = #3

Lack of policy implementation and/or lack of effective implementation mechanisms = #3



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



It is important to note that many persons with disabilities and many other people close to them or those who provide assistance are not aware of how ICTs can help them access education throughout lifetime.





24




Figure 7 : guiDing principles FOr intrODuctiOn

OF icts in teacHing anD learning OF persOns

WitH Disabilities.



Communication is essential to all forms of social interaction and participation and tech-

nology helps people to communicate in many effective ways. Indeed, widespread ICT

usage and increasing integration of ICTs into in every aspect of life plays an important role

in building societies that are more inclusive for persons with disabilities. ICTs can help

ensure that persons with disabilities have a greater access to knowledge and independent

living. However, there are a few principles that should be taken into consideration while of

introducing ICTs.



First, ICTs needs to be accessible to all persons and not just to persons with disabilities. All

persons ought to be able to access ICTs that help to facilitate communication in different

cultural, educational, and professional situations.



Another principle is that particular forms or approaches to ICT should reflect the goal of

fostering greater participation and inclusion. Mobile technologies, for example, enable

access for everyone, including persons with disabilities, to access services at the time of

need, thus unleashing huge potential for independent living within inclusive societies.



Additionally, where possible, technologies ought to be designed to be as inclusive as possi-

ble to all persons, as opposed to further development of certain technologies that would

only be used specifically by persons with disabilities. This is important to help facilitate

greater inclusion and universal accessibility to mainstream communication technologies.

Naturally there will be some circumstances where specialized technologies are necessary,

but these will become increasingly rare as technology becomes more universally available.





25




A further important principle refers to the level of independence and control persons with disabilities have in their use of ICTs. Indeed, all persons, including those with disabilities have personal preferences for particular technologies and they ought to be able to choose the ICT that best serves them. It is important to take into consideration that the primary purpose of any ICT is that it be controlled to fulfil the functions required by its user.



Finally, it is critical to consider behaviour of the community that surrounds persons with disabilities. Communication that harnesses ICT may require more time than conventional speech processes. For this reason, members of the community should be aware of the importance of waiting for ICT-aided communication; those involved in teaching processes can model this for the larger community. ICT training courses should play a part in stand-ard teacher training programs so that educators become aware of the different uses and users of technologies.



In conclusion, these general principles may guide decisions about the types of technolo-gies that should be used. With that said, important questions remain in terms of content accessibility. There is a clear need for standards to be developed that ensure that ICT is used to make content more accessible in different forms for persons with varying abilities and disabilities.



Excerpt of an interview of Douglas Biklen (USA) wins UNESCO/Emir Jaber al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah Prize to Promote Quality Education for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities 2011.





26




Figure 8 : Main challenges to be addressed for enabling access to job opportunities persons with disabilities



EMpLOYMEnT



Challenges priority

Cost of assistive technologies #1

Lack of policies which foster widespread availability of accessible ICTs #2

Lack of policy implementation and/or lack of effective implementation mechanisms #3



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



Access to information and knowledge is an essen- attitudinal barriers are still highly prevalent

tial component of inclusive social and economic in the workplace. Persons with disabilities are

development. In this regard, one important perceived as unable to perform highly-skilled

barrier highlighted during the consultation is jobs. This barrier creates a situation where the

the lack of competencies of school teachers to use only jobs available for persons with disabilities



tencies (which include not only ICT command/ research has shown that persons with disabili- knowledge, but also skills and positive attitudes ties are twice as likely to be unemployed all over ICTs. When teachers lack the required compe- are low-skilled labour. Furthermore, OECD

towards use of ICT and assistive technology in

the OECD and that, when employed, persons

these technologies for setting inclusive class- with disabilities work part-time or at reduced educational settings) it is very difficult to use

rooms open to the participation of persons hours more often than others. Consequently,

with disabilities. the purchasing power of persons with disabil-

ities is comparatively lower than that of other

As far as the challenges to promote the employ- groups, which in turn aggravates the issue of

ment of persons with disabilities are concerned, affordability of accessible ICTs.





27




Figure 9 : Main challenges to be addressed for enabling independent living for persons with disabilities



IndEpEndEnT LIvInG



Challenges priority

Cost of assistive technologies #1

Limited access to technology #2

Lack of accessibility of ICT devices #3



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



EnsUrInG ACCEss TO InfOrMATIOn with disabilities should take into account the

And IndEpEndEnT LIvInG TO expertise of clients with disabilities, as well

pErsOns WITH dIsABILITIEs as input from librarians, while also keeping

In some countries, information providers such in mind libraries’ responsibilities to protect



where persons with disabilities can ask and ble information entrusted to perform services. receive professional advice and support regard- In order to derive a maximum benefit from as libraries have become centres of expertise the confidentiality of all personally identifia-



tion ICT development, professionals such as librar- ing how to better access content and informa-

(see figure 10). However, in many countries

the option to access these centres and their ians should be equipped and trained to use

materials through the use of ICT is not yet fully ICTs and assistive technologies in order to

available for persons with disabilities. In coun- provide professional assistance. tries where libraries provide special services,

most of them still require retention of exten- With regards to independent living, the table

sive patron records, such as a user’s transaction below lists the main challenges to be addressed

history. The development of new ICTs, services if the ICT opportunity is to be maximized

and content that will benefit library clients for persons with disabilities.





28




Figure 10 : librarians as service prOviDers tO

persOns WitH Disabilities



Librarians as information providers ought to serve as a centre of expertise where persons

with disabilities may seek advice on accessing e-content suited to their specific

set of abilities.



The provision of this public service would require library professionals to develop

awareness of the following points and principles during their training on disability-

related issues:



Firstly, they should have a broad knowledge of different digital formats, and their varying

accessibility for persons with diverse learning needs. For example, the appearance of text

on screen does not necessarily mean that it is accessible. Library professionals ought to be

able to access alternative formats of content suited to users’ specific needs.



Library professionals should also be familiar with emerging e-reading systems and of

what the market is or will be able to provide in terms of e-reading. E-readers vary in their

settings and user technology, and librarians should be able to advise on their specificities

for readers who prefer not to use printed books. In addition, librarians should have knowl-

edge on specialized libraries (for instance “library of the blind”) and other providers that

exist to meet the varied demands of persons with disabilities.





29




Finally, they ought to have a general understanding of the ways different disabilities affect reading abilities so as to help persons with disabilities efficiently. Librarians should receive disability sensitisation and awareness-raising on the rights of persons with disabilities as part of their own learning curriculum and continuing education.



Libraries and library associations with knowledge and experience in facilitating persons with disabilities’ access to information can serve as helpful sources of information on how libraries and ICT developers can meet the relevant needs of persons with disabilities. With that said, the privacy of clients with disabilities’ user data needs to must be maintained on an equal basis with that of other clients.



With this role as a service provider to persons with disabilities, libraries can also play an important role as data-providers for industry. For example, if sanctioned by a national law register, they may benefit ICT companies by supplying information regarding their customers’ registered disabilities. In addition to persons with disabilities and their repre-sentative organizations (who would be the best source as to persons with disabilities’ specific needs), librarians can also be a supplemental source of input to ICT developers, as they can provide ICT developers valuable information (with user personal data removed) from the perspective of the point of service, use or delivery of some accessible ICTs.

Excerpt of an interview of Koen Krikhaar, Chair of International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA), section Libraries serving Persons with Print Disabilities, the Netherlands.





30




“ICT should be seen to enable social inclusion of persons with

disabilities by fostering independent living.



A key aspect of this is, where possible, differences between the

technologies used at home and those used at work should be

minimised. Learning how to use assistive technologies can take

time and present challenges for persons with disabilities as it is.

Therefore, greater homogenization between technologies used

in the home and workplace would help to ensure that Persons with

Disabilities do not have to employ disproportionate amounts of

time and effort learning to use different technologies.



The purpose of building inclusive societies is to foster harmony

between all persons, by enabling persons with disabilities to



AddITIOnAL CHALLEnGEs disabilities, further study regarding suitable

TO BE COnsIdErEd frequency ranges and technical characteristics

In addition to the previously mentioned chal- for hearing aids which can satisfactorily operate

lenges, the consultation highlighted a number internationally is necessary of issues that should be addressed to continue

expanding the ICT opportunities to persons Second, further and on-going research is neces-

with disabilities. First, the availability of radio sary to better understand the challenges faced

frequency spectrum presents a challenge in by persons with disabilities. Particularly needed

terms of the identification of additional suit- is research and building of knowledge in evalu-

able frequency ranges to support the wireless ation methods for disability-inclusive projects

communication needs of persons with disa- and policies and cross-disciplinary studies

bilities. One particular challenge is the diffi- adopting a holistic perspective. culty in finding suitable frequencies for hearing

aids. Considering the international mobiliza- Third, efforts regarding the advancement of

tion to promote the socio-economic inclusion the use of ICTs in disability-inclusive efforts

and improve the quality of life of persons with often suffer from the isolation of efforts. This a





31




be integrated in mainstream environments. Adoption of this Framework would help to nurture such an enabling environment by harnessing the power of ICTs, making them more accessible, user-friendly and better equipped to meet the diverse needs of persons with disabilities.



In the same way that the sooner a child learns to use technologies, the easier their learning will be, so too it is the case for children and persons with disabilities. The faster and easier they find it to use ICTs, the easier it will be for them to reap the full rewards of education and social inclusion”

Loubna Cherif Kanouni, President and Founder, Morrocan Association for Children with Cerebral Palsy and Mental Retardation (AMI), Morocco



challenge to be taken into account, especially as make phone calls in sign language or via captions.

it is widely acknowledged that the most success- Their implementation was made possible thanks

ful examples of inclusion of persons with disa- to collaboration amongst stakeholders, which

bilities have witnessed catalytic integration has led to government legislation. These services

of various stakeholders in different sectors of significantly improved the lives of deaf persons

society coming together to work for improve- in the workplace, education, community and at

ment and change. home. Adopting a multi-stakeholder approach is

a critical factor success for developing solutions

As an example, the city of Copenhagen under- leading to a more inclusive society. went a drastic accessibility overhaul after valu-

able collaboration amongst stakeholders. Now, These were the main challenges and barriers

the city has vastly improved accessible infra- highlighted during the consultation. Section 4

structure and services for all persons. Another presents a roadmap of actions proposed by the

example is the implementation of video and experts for each stakeholder to address these

captioned telephone relay services in the USA issues and enable a disability-inclusive develop-

and other countries. These allow deaf persons to ment agenda through the use of ICTs.

Figure 11 : ict accessibility: taking respOnsibility anD cOOperating glObally





ICT accessibility is still perceived as a small market by some private sector actors and not taken into consideration in many governments and civil society organizations. In these cases, accessibility departments are under-resourced and given limited opportunity to improve accessibility of market products and services. Further, the ICT accessibility field generally suffers from a situation of lack of stakeholder coordination, where “the right hand does not know what the left hand is doing”. This situation has three main causes:



1) Lack of awareness and training. The degree of disconnect in awareness can be seen by

the limited accessibility of the products and services available in the market, compared to relative need. Furthermore, accessibility experts, marketing product managers and engineers who do not receive accessibility-related training, do not have a comprehensive perspective of needs of the different groups of persons with disabilities. In some cases there is also the misconception that spending money on making products accessible is not worth the investment as it restrains innovation for products largely targeting the non-disabled market.



2) Lack of cooperation. Although convergence requires the industry to work together, too

many accessibility actors continue to work in isolation. Software developers and hard-ware vendors tend to not blend their expertise with each other and use exclusive proprie-tary solutions developed in-house. Similarly, international standards are still developed without taking into account existing solutions or standards. Both situations are gradu-ally being addressed through introduction of coordination mechanisms, such as the ITU Joint-Coordinating Activity on Accessibility and Human Factors, and examples of how cooperation is the most effective way to take advantage of the synergies in initiatives being undertaking by organizations.



3) Lack of harmonization. Accessibility does not easily travel across borders. What

is applied in one country will not be suitable to be applied or implemented in another country due to different regulations and needs. This situation can be addressed through policy and regulation harmonization of policies and regulation, precisely to encourage the private sector to address the previously mentioned challenges.

Fortunately, the following existing approaches can be introduced exist to alter business behaviour and achieve better application of article 9 of the UNCRPD:





Awareness Awareness raising activities help the public and the private raising sector understand that immediate application of the principle

of universal design in product and service development will prove cost-efficient by avoiding expensive retrofitting when future regulation force company compliance.

Strengthening direct involvement of persons with disabilities in product development would improve the understanding the needs are the effectiveness of accessibility tests.

Cooperation For ensuring accessibility, conformity and interoperabil-

ity, the industry could take responsibility, cooperate glob-ally and harmonize accessibility practices through standards development.

International standards need to consistently include accessi-bility features and be implemented and licensed fairly to all industry regardless of intellectual property restrictions.

Standards bodies have to increase the participation of persons with disabilities in standards meetings.

Harmonisation At the national level, the harmonisation of regulation can

promote widespread implementation of accessibility standards.

At the global level, improved cooperation between industries on the sharing of intellectual proprietary of respective propri-etary standards should be promoted.



Andrea Saks, International Telecommunications Specialist for the Deaf, Chairman Joint-Coordinating Activity on Accessibility and Human Factors (JCA-ACH), ITU-T and Coordinator at the IGF Dynamic Coalition on Accessibility and Disability.





tHe




Way



FOrWarD



4.



Without a doubt, ICTs have a key role to play community must address the existing inter-

in enabling a post-2015 development dependent barriers outlined in the previ-framework in which persons with disabilities ous section in order to fully leverage

are both beneficiaries and agents of develo- the potential of ICTs in the lives of persons

p ment efforts. However, the international with disabilities.



Figure 12 : interlinkages betWeen stakeHOlDers anD

interDepenDence OF barriers



“It is recognised that the right of accessibility may be in conflict with authorial and other rights and may conflict with the commercial duty to maximise shareholder value; and it may also be a case that in some jurisdictions corporate social responsibility is subsidiary to maximising shareholder value. It is therefore vital that such issues be resolved through the rational application of economic criteria to determine the appropri-ate level of economic investment in accessibility by government, commerce and civil society and to determine the degree and nature of transparent regulation and legislation based on the importance of the goods and services and the proportionality of investment

to social gain.”

Kevin Carey, Chair of the Technology Working Group, World Blind Union





35




There are also potential risks that should be the expected results unless these pre-conditions

taken into consideration when generalizing the are met. For instance, all stakeholders should

use of ICTs in development, in order to avoid be cautious that widespread implementation of

that these technologies introduce new barriers. accessible ICTs does not put culture at risk, as

The main risk is creating the expectation that the observed decline in deaf individuals learn-

accessible ICTs alone can solve all the challenges ing sign language and blind individuals learning

faced by persons with disabilities. Maximizing Braille is already becoming a trend. It is import-

the potential benefit of ICTs requires a proper ant to stress that learning sign language and

understanding of the full range of challenges Braille are fundamental parts of intellectual

and barriers faced by persons with disabilities in development as they are integral to acquiring

each local context, as well as a proper definition language and reading and writing skills. ICTs

and implementation of effective national public should not be seen as a substitute for that, but as

policies so that the right ICTs-enabled services another layer of communication and inclusion (e.g.

can be introduced. remote learning/distance education and lang-

uage development for deaf children and adults).

Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that

as there is a wide range of accessibility barriers The second most relevant risk identified in the

faced by persons with disabilities and the inter- consultation is a possible widening of the digital

ventions using ICTs could vary radically. The divide. The prevailing costs of assistive tech-

implementation and use of ICTs will not have nologies may introduce the digital exclusion of





36




persons with disabilities living in a developing be recuperated. There is a risk of not identifying,

country that may not be able to afford these minimizing and reducing such costs, in all coun-

technologies or, increase existing inequalities triesxxi. These and other risks are addressed in and multiple discrimination against persons this section, which presents a proposal of prior-

with disabilities who, in addition to discrim- ity actions to be undertaken by each major group

ination based on disability, also experience of stakeholders to leverage the ICT opportunity

discrimination on the basis of gender or indige- for persons with disabilities. nous heritage, for examplexx. However, it should

be noted that there is a wide range of technology THE rOLE Of GOvErnMEnTs available with various degrees of product and Governments can play a key role in stimulat-

service specialization, at a wide range of price ing the introduction of ICT-enabled solutions

points. Digital exclusion is particularly linked to adapted to the needs of persons with disabilities,

high-end assistive technologies which costs will increasing the availability of accessible ICTs and

be relatively much higher than the majority of promoting the affordability of assistive tech-

assistive technologies. nologies in social, educational, economic and

other domains. These benefits can be achieved

The pace of technological change is also a through the promotion of national innovation

risk to be considered. Often ICTs with acces- systems that foster public-private collaboration,

sible features lag behind new generations of as well as development and diffusion of knowl-

ICTs coming out as often as every six months. edge, accessible products and content as well as

Moreover, accessibility features are often only assistive technologies. added after initial release of new technology

and goods, causing delay and inequalities in As the number of State Parties to the UNCRPD

persons with disabilities’ access to ICTs. Acces- continues increasing, work is required at

sibility add-ons or “fixes” are sometimes availa- policy level to foster a greater awareness that

ble only at additional cost and much later than the UNCRPD is a comprehensive and integral

the release of goods- by which time sometimes normative instrument which highlights the

newer generations may soon be emerging or importance of ICTs and accessibility. Accessibil-

may have emerged. Thus, an additional cost is ity and use of ICTs by persons with disabilities

the extra time persons with disabilities and/or should be seen as an integral part in enabling

others spend trying to increase accessibility of them to enjoy all human rights and fundamen-

purchased ICTs – time which obviously cannot tal freedoms.





37




Figure 13 : priority actions for governments



GOvErnMEnTs



priority actions prioritization

Strengthening research and development to develop new ICT-enabled solutions

#1

for persons with disabilities

Incorporating accessibility requirements in procurement policies = #2

Updating disability legislation to include ICTs in the legal definition of accessibility = #2



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



It is important to raise awareness of policy prioritization of actions as defined by the expert

and decision makers on the need for elabo- views gathered in the consultation. ration of interlinked normative frameworks

regarding the use ICTs and assistive technol- The notion of accessibility entails the removal of

ogies by persons with disabilities. UNESCO’s environmental barriers that prevent persons with

Global Report xxii (2013) states that there are disabilities from fully participating in economic

very few countries with a dedicated ministry and social activities. By leveraging their spend-

for persons with disabilities. Additionally, in ing power in buying goods and services, national

many countries all matters relating to disabil- governments can address the market failure

ity are handled only under the ministry of social whereby demand for accessible products and

welfare - including education, employment, etc. services does not meet the offer of these products

There is now a positive trend to move away from because of their lack of availability, affordability

this situation, however. In most cases, interven- and/or accessibility. tions for this important group of the population

are undertaken by multiple agencies or minis- Introducing mandatory procurement policies

tries of government. Efforts to do a situation that incorporate accessibility-related require-

analysis and implement article 33 is suggested as ments in calls for tenders has the potential to

a preliminary step governments should take to create a critical mass, conceivably turning the

implement the UNCRPD. market of accessible products into an interesting Figure 13 presents the





38




Figure 14 : Countries that included ICT accessibility in their national broadband plans



costa rica Colombia algeria

barbados australia

croatia cyprus belize Denmark chad

Dominican

egypt estonia France iceland republic

Jamaica



grenada ireland Japan korea macedonia



Liechtenstein mauritius singapore mexico malta



philippines slovenia sri lanka St kitts poland and Nevis tanzania Zimbabwe sweden usa united kingdom Switzerland

turkey



Increasing accessibility ICTs to increase accessibility

of ICTs for persons with of other services and promote

disabilities social inclusion



Bold: countries having signed the UNCRPD,

Bold and underlined: countries having signed and ratified the UNCRPD

Source: ITU, 2013 and analysis made by the Secretariat of the Broadband Commission

Note: Uganda features references to accessibility which do not fit into one of the three categories





39




and profitable one for vendors, developers and the inclusion of key socio-economic policy issues

manufacturers. Such competitive market would such as youth, gender and ICT accessibility in

lead to a greater availability of these products, national broadband policies (March 2013). The

consequently decreasing their final price for results of this review show that only 37% of the

persons with disabilities. Additionally, it would policies analysed include relevant references to

raise awareness of vendors, developers and manu- ICT accessibility. In comparison to the 10 other

facturers of their roles in including persons with issues examined in the analysis, ICT accessibil-

disabilities and in upholding the UNCRPD. ity was the third-to-last in national broadband

policy inclusions.

This is particularly important when considering



from accessible ICTs is large, each individual in national broadband plans, the review found that 14% of these policies referred to “improv- group of users with disabilities (e.g. mobility, that while the overall population that benefits Having analysed references to ICT accessibility



sensorial or cognitive) may not be large enough ing the accessibility of ICTs” while 12% referred to “promoting economic and social inclusion to influence market forces. National regula- through the use of accessible ICTs” and only 7% of tors and policy makers can address this market the plans included both mentions (see figure 14 ). failure through public interventions and activ-

ities such as, but not limited to, the incorpora- Similarly, the 2012 G3ict UNCRPD ICT Acces-

tion of accessibility requirements into public sibility Progress Report found that only 36.4%

procurement policies, the introduction of of countries which have ratified the UNCRPD

subsidies and the strengthening of research have a definition of accessibility which includes

and development. ICT or electronic media in the country laws

or regulations.

While it is widely acknowledged that ICTs

enhance the participation and inclusion of This demonstrates a lack of understanding of

persons with disabilities in social, economic, the opportunity that ICT accessibility repre-

political and cultural life, the reference to ICT is sents for enabling the social and economic inclu-

rarely incorporated into disability-related legis- sion of persons with disabilities. In many coun-

lation. The Broadband Commission for Digital tries, the definition of disability is complex and

Development recently conducted a review on evolving. It can also differ significantly from one





40




country to another. This lack of harmonization THE UnITEd nATIOns sYsTEM in the definition has an impact on interventions, And OTHEr InTErnATIOnAL recourses and tools needed or to be allocated. OrGAnIzATIOns Similarly, the lack of understanding that ICTs The agencies, programmes and bodies of the

and assistive technologies play an important United Nations system are playing an important

role in helping persons with disabilities to make role in the definition of the post-2015 interna-

the transition from education to work (from tional development agenda. While each member

acquisition of soft skills to technical, and soci- of the family contributes by bringing their own

etal skills) is also linked to societal attitudes, perspective and mandatexxiii it is important that

existing stereotypes, and even harmful prac- the collective delivers as one to incorporate the

tices. Furthermore, updating disability legis- issue of disability into the discussions, identify-

lation to include ICTs in the legal definition of ing the key barriers that need to be addressed

accessibility would also allow to mainstream and the main opportunities - such as the use of

disability in ICT-related policies, plans and ICTs - that can be leveraged to achieve a post-

programmes. Lastly, opportunities brought by 2015 disability-inclusive development agenda.

universal service funds are often put forward to

finance or subsidize accessibility-related initia- In this context, the expert views gathered in

tives. Considering this recommendation, effec- the consultation highlight that the most urgent

tive legislation is a critical prerequisite to bring action to be undertaken by the UN system is

about effective and sustainable improvements. the implementation of operational activities to

meet the disability-inclusive development goals,

By undertaking the aforementioned three prior- complemented by the monitoring and evaluation

ity actions, governments will be creating an of development efforts at the global, regional

enabling environment that provides incentives and national levels along with the performance

to other stakeholders to advance the inclusion of review to assess whether development policies,

persons with disabilities in development efforts. programmes and projects are effective and

results-driven (see figure 15). In this respect, it is

important to ensure that the analysis of results





41




Figure 15 : Priority actions for international organizations



UnITEd nATIOns



priority actions prioritization

Carrying out operational activities to meet the disability-inclusive

#1

development goals

Monitoring and evaluating development efforts on the global, reg. and national level #2

Analysing results to determine whether development policies, programmes and

= #3

projects are effective

Setting awareness raising and mobilization campaign to create a

= #3

demand for action



InTErnATIOnAL OrGAnIzATIOns



priority actions prioritization

Participating in international standardizations bodies to develop and/or

#1

harmonizing accessible ICT standards

Strengthening research and development to develop new ICT-enabled solutions

#2

for persons with disabilities

Raising policy makers’ awareness of accessibility barriers to be addressed #3



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation





42




is quantitative and supported by consistent whole community organizations are trained

data. The necessary national and global needed on how to maximize the potential of ICTs to

data on the use of ICT by persons with disabili- improve the social, economic and political

ties has yet to be collected. It is also important to participation of persons with disabilities in the

ensure that analysis of results is designed with community life. the participation of persons with disabilities,

in order to make sure that the correct factors International organizations are another key

are measured. Lastly, the United Nations has category of stakeholders, as they also play a

to continue implementing awareness-raising special role in providing a neutral platform from

activities and mobilization campaigns in order which develop and harmonize international

to create a demand for national governmental standards and provide recommendations related

action. to accessible ICTs. Furthermore, international

organizations can contribute to the promotion

The United Nations system can also take a more of research and development focused on devel-

active role in identifying and engaging relevant oping specific ICT-enabled solutions for persons

stakeholders to promote collaboration across with disabilities. Lastly, international organi-

the broad range of actors for the development of zations bear the responsibility to raise policy

ICT-enabled solutions for persons with disabili- makers’ awareness of accessibility barriers

ties. Such stakeholders include ICT manufactur- to be addressed. ers, developers, and vendors, as well as creators

and distributers whose content can be made These priority actions were highlighted as essen-

accessible in different languages and through tial for removing the barriers that still prevent

various types of ICTs. This is particularly neces- persons with disabilities from accessing social

sary for the development of technical stand- and economic opportunities. The next section

ards, building capacity, sharing good practices complements this roadmap with a set of indica-

and encouraging new partnership mechanisms. tors for measuring progress towards a disability

At the community level, it is important that the -inclusive economic and social development.





44




THE rOLE Of prIvATE sECTOr

Private sector entities are already playing a key principles at the earliest stage of product

role in designing, manufacturing, developing development would be two approaches to address

and putting into the market key ICT-enabled the cost issue. Although these actions may

solutions for persons with disabilities. However, mean higher development costs, this additional

this crucial contribution may currently be investment presents an important market

limited due to the high cost that many of these opportunity, considering that the annual

solutions imply for persons with disabilities, in disposable income of persons with disabilities

particular in developing contexts. Addressing and their relatives represents US$ 9 trillionxxiv. this issue and introducing measures to lower

the cost of assistive solutions are main priority Available best practices indicate that there is

actions identified in the context of the consulta- value in involving persons with disabilities in

tion (see figure 16). product development in early development

stages, testing, focus groups, as well as at various

Increasing research and development in decision-making levels. Incorporating personal

this area and incorporating universal design experiences and insights of each group of





45




Figure 16 : Priority actions for the private sector



prIvATE sECTOr



priority actions prioritization

Lowering the cost of assistive technologies #1

Training information technology professionals on ICT accessibility #2

Strengthening research and development to develop new ICT-enabled solutions

#3

for persons with disabilities



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



persons with disabilities allows better under- The private sector can help raising awareness

standing and meeting their needs and contrib- of policy-makers and civil society organizations

utes to making products and services accessible on existing accessible devices and services. This

by design. can be done through corporate and product-re-

lated communication activities and through the

Another priority action is to address the designation of a corporate liaison to coordinate

shortage of information technology profes- these activities. sionals with ICT accessibility skills. This

shortage can be addressed by organising inter- Finally, the private sector has a vital role to play

nal training programmes on ICT accessibil- regarding the employment of persons with disa-

ity, adding this issue to university curricula, bilities. By removing attitudinal barriers and

as well as to programmes of conferences making the workplace accessible, employers can

carried out by professional societies and greatly contribute to a society where persons

in periodicals published by each segment of with disabilities can participate in work life, and

the industry. have increased independence.





46




THE rOLE Of CIvIL sOCIETY And Commission (IEC), which are open to the partic-

OrGAnIzATIOns Of pErsOns WITH ipation of civil society. New multi-sectorial and

dIsABILITIEs multi-stakeholder partnership mechanisms and

Organizations of persons with disabilities and initiatives are also encouraged between inter-

other civil society organizations are essential in national organizations such as UNESCO or

promoting coordinated action among persons ITU and civil society as it helps to ensure long-

with disabilities and other citizens. They posi- term sustainability of initiatives for inclusion of

tively contribute to development efforts as they persons with disabilities, maximise participa-

allow mobilizing social capital and organizing tion, and oversee the monitoring and implemen-

collective action, thus enhancing interactions tation of policies and practices. between communities and other stakeholders.

Civil society organizations also have the ability

Civil society organizations can play a key role to bring about social progress and economic

in promoting the use of ICTs as an enabler of a growth by raising the awareness of persons with

disability-inclusive development framework. disabilities and their parents of what ICTs can do

In particular, they have a tremendous priority to facilitate their economic and social inclusion.

identified in the consultation (see figure 17). In addition, these organizations can undertake

Additionally, these organizations can contrib- extensive trainingxxv of persons with disabili-ute to the development of relevant national ties on the use of these ICT tools. Such training

policies through their involvement in national could cover the whole range of potential uses,

consultations led by policy makers. Civil society such as adopting ICTs for basic communications,

organizations also need to become more active accessing key public services or using ICTs in a

in the work conducted by international stand- professional context. Lastly, one priority action

ards organizations that are working on these to be considered by civil society organizations

technologies, including consortium-based and is advocacy for the mainstreaming of the use

voluntary standards, as well as formal stand- of the universal design principle in all develop-

ards developed by organizations such as the ment efforts. This would contribute to ensuring

ITU, the International Standards Organization that the international development framework

(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical is disability-inclusive.





47




Figure 17 : Priority actions for the civil society and organizations of persons with disabilities



CIvIL sOCIETY



priority actions prioritization

Raising policy makers’ awareness of accessibility barriers to be addressed #1

Mainstreaming the use of universal design principle #2

Getting organizations of persons with disabilities involved in policy making #3



OrGAnIzATIOns Of pErsOns WITH dIsABILITIEs



priority actions prioritization

Training persons with disabilities to use accessible ICTs #1

Raising persons with disabilities’ awareness of what ICT can do to facilitate their

#2

economic and social inclusion

Getting organizations of persons with disabilities involved in policy making #3



Source: Authors, based on the results of the ICT consultation



a prOpOsal



OF



inDicatOrs



FOr



measuring



prOgress



5.



This section presents a proposal of measura- ICTs to achieve a disability-inclusive agenda.

ble indicators has proven to be a valid strategy These preliminary indicators can be further

in advancing the implementation of the global refined by involving relevant stakeholders in

development agenda. The consultation has each domain and by defining time-bounded

gathered the following set of indicators to goals, to be integrated with the Sustainable

support the definition of an action oriented Development Goals to be agreed as part of the

agenda aimed at fulfilling the contribution of post-2015 discussions.





49




GEnErAL IndICATOrs – Access, accessibility and awareness



• Access to ICTs based on impairment type per technology (telephone, Internet,

broadband)

• Availability of accessible ICT products and services across markets • Affordability of ICTs for persons with disabilities

• Proportion of ICT products and services with built-in accessibility functions • Awareness rate of persons with disabilities on the use of ICTs to improve their

economic and social inclusion

• Disability legislation updated with the inclusion of ICTs in the definition of

accessibility

• GDP proportion spent on research and development relating to ICT-enabled

solutions for persons with disabilities

• Total of patents filed/awarded to ICT-enabled solutions for persons with disabilities



IndICATOrs BY sECTOr



Healthcare

• Proportion of persons with disabilities accessing healthcare services through ICTs

primary, secondary and tertiary education

• Digital literacy rate among schoolteachers and students

• Availability of accessible ICTs in primary and secondary schools and in • Special teacher training programmes and courses on inclusive ICTs

professional and lifelong education

• Digital literacy rate among persons with disabilities





50




IndICATOrs BY sECTOr



Employment

• Digital literacy of employees with disabilities

• Persons with disabilities employment rate

• Persons with disabilities employed in the public sector

• Persons with disabilities employed in the Healthcare sector

• Persons with disabilities employed in the Education sector

• Persons with disabilities employed in national governments on e-government services

• Persons with disabilities employed in national governments on employment-related

policy issues

• Persons with disabilities employed in national governments on independent living-

related policy issues

• Persons with disabilities using ICTs in the workplace

Independent living

• Proportion of persons with disabilities using ICTs for living independently

Government services

• Proportion of persons with disabilities accessing e-government services

• Proportion of persons with disabilities accessing accessible public information

participation in political and public life

• Proportion of persons with disabilities using ICTs to participate in social and political

activities





51




“ The divide that separates persons



with disabilities from other persons, in



having equal and easy access to ICT,



must be bridged. ITU’s standards are



designed from inception to help achieve



that goal - universal access to commu-



nications for everyone, with a focus on



availability, and affordability. Globally



standardized solutions increase market



size, usability and interoperability, and



reduce complexity and cost.”



Malcolm Johnson, Elected Director of the ITU

Telecommunication Standardization Bureau



These are the experiences, challenges and to be overcome and proposing a roadmap of

recommendations gathered as a contribution actions, this report invites all stakeholders to

to the HLMDD. By further presenting the ICT acknowledge the role of ICTs as critical enablers

opportunity for persons with disabilities, iden- of a disability-inclusive international develop-

tifying the remaining challenges and barriers ment agenda.





52




enDnOtes



I. UN (2006) “Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities”. Available at: www.

un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml

II. As of April 2013.

III. As of April 2013.

IV. ITU, “Connect a School, Connect a Community toolkit”, Module 4: Using ICTs to

promote education and training for persons with disabilities. The ITU-G3ict “e-Ac-cessibility Policy Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities” is an online toolkit designed to assist policy-makers to implement the ICT accessibility dispositions of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

V. ITU’s Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D) fosters international

cooperation and solidarity in the delivery of technical assistance and in the crea-tion, development and improvement of telecommunication/ICT equipment and networks in developing countries. ITU-D implements projects under the United Nations development system or other funding arrangements, so as to facilitate and enhance telecommunication/ICT development by offering, organizing and coordi-nating technical cooperation and assistance activities.

VI. ITU and G3ict (2012) “Making Mobile Phones and Services Accessible for Persons with

Disabilities” August 2012. See also: ITU and G3ict (2011) “Making Television Accessi-ble”, November 2011. Available at: www.itu.int/ITU-D/sis/Persons with disabilities/ Documents/ITU-G3ict%20Making_TV_Accessible_Report_November_2011.pdf

VII. More information on the survey questions at www.itu.int/accessibility.

VIII. The ITU Correspondence Group on the Elaboration of a Working Definition of the

Term “ICT” is currently working on this matter. Its final report will be presented to ITU Council in May 2014 and to ITU Plenipotentiary Conference in October 2014. Additional information is available on the Correspondence Group website (www.itu.int/ITU-D/study_groups/SGP_2010-2014/groups/definition/).





53




IX. The table below can be read in 2 different ways. First, each line shows the extent to

which each technology (websites, mobile device and services, TV set and services, radio, other and emerging technologies) improves persons with disabilities’ access to one specific social and/or economic activity. When looking at the columns, they highlight the impact of one specific technology across social and/or economic activ-ities (Healthcare, Primary education, Secondary education, Tertiary, professional, lifelong education, Independent living, Governments services and Participation in political and public life).

X. These guidelines aim to provide a single shared standard for web content accessibil-

ity. More information can be found at the following link (www.w3.org/WAI/intro/ wcag.php).

XI. More information available at: www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/cata-

logue_detail.htm?csnumber=58625

XII. ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) assemble experts from

around the world in develop international standards known as ITU-T Recommen-dations which act as defining elements in the global infrastructure of ICT. From its inception in 1865, ITU-T has driven a contribution-led, consensus-based approach to standards development in which all countries and companies, no matter how large or small, are afforded equal rights to influence the development of ITU-T Recommendations. From its beginnings as a body standardizing international tele-graph exchange, through its formative role in telecommunications, and in today’s converged ICT ecosystem, ITU-T has provided the world’s best facilities to the global standardization community and remains the world’s only truly global ICT standards body.

XIII. ITU-T Technical Paper FSTP-TACL (2006), “Telecommunications Accessibility

Checklist”, www.itu.int/pub/T-TUT-FSTP-2006-TACL





54




enDnOtes



XIV. The ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) plays a vital role in the global

management of the radio-frequency spectrum and satellite orbits - limited natural resources which are increasingly in demand from a large and growing number of services such as fixed, mobile, broadcasting, amateur, space research, emergency telecommunications, meteorology, global positioning systems, environmental moni-toring and communication services - that ensure safety of life on land, at sea and in the skies. Its mission is to ensure the rational, equitable, efficient and economical use of the radio-frequency spectrum by all radiocommunication services, including those using satellite orbits, and to carry out studies and approve Recommendations on radiocommunication matters.

XV. The Study Groups of ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T)

assemble experts from around the world to develop international standards known as ITU-T Recommendations which act as defining elements in the global infrastruc-ture of ICT. ITU-T drives a contribution-led, consensus-based approach to standards development in which all countries and companies, no matter how large or small, are afforded equal rights to influence the development of ITU-T Recommendations.

XVI. This service can be set up to automatically “bridge in” a third party (such as a family

member, agency, or friend) who can assist the call taker with the emergency call placed by a subscriber, or alert a third party when an emergency call is placed by a subscriber.

XVII. Assistive technology support is extremely weak in most developing nations as well

as in nations with a low Human Development Index ranking.

XVIII. G3ict (2012) “CRPD 2012 ICT Accessibility Progress Report”. Available at:

www.g3ict.org/resource_center/publications_and_reports/p/productCategory_ whitepapers/subCat_0/id_244

XIX. All the results gathered relating to the prioritization of main challenges to be

addressed to maximize the ICT opportunity for persons with disabilities in each area of development are made available at www.itu.int/accessibility





55




XX. These should be addressed in consultation with the relevant groups and by the

collection of disaggregated data.

XXI. One way to avoid this problem would be to spread the acceptance and utilize stand-

ardization documents such as “ITU-T Recommendation F.790:Telecommunications accessibility guidelines for older persons and persons with disabilities” (web link: www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-F.790-200701-I/en) and “ISO/IEC Guide 71: guideline for standards developers to address the needs of older persons and persons with disabili-ties” (web link: www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=33987).

XXII. UNESCO (2013) “UNESCO Global Report. Opening New Avenue for Empowerment.

ICT to Access Information and Knowledge for Persons with Disabilities”. Paris. www. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002197/219767e.pdf

XXIII. Fifth Quadrant Analytics (2012) “Emerging Giant – Big is not Enough, The Global

Economics of Disability”, March 1, 2012. Available at: www.thinkbeyondthela-bel.com/Blog/file.axd?file=2012%2F5%2FThe+Global+Economics+of+Disabil-ity+2012.pdf

XXIV. An expert stated that a prerequisite to these training activities was a mapping

(software, hardware and course) that would assess the relevance of existing and currently used ATs as well as the required training programs. It was also suggested that UN system could gather these tools in a cloud computing platform. This will help telecenters and other organizations support the training of persons with disa-bilities in an inclusive developmental approach.

XXV. Advancing in the implementation of Resolution 175 (Guadalajara, 2010), and in light

of Article 12 of the International Telecommunications Regulations, adopted at the 2012 World Conference on International Telecommunications, ITU has undertaken to enable the full participation of persons with disabilities in the activities of the Union, and to promote the empowerment of persons with disabilities through the use of ICTs worldwide.





56




annex i – list OF OrganizatiOns invOlveD



This report has gathered the experiences, views, recommendations and proposals from

the following organizations, which took part in the ICT consultation in support of the

HLMDD (organizations listed alphabetically by name).



A



ABC, Mexico

Ability Net, UK

Accessible Media Inc. (AMI), Canada

ADD International, Sudan

Agency for Disabled People, Bulgaria

Alcatel-Lucent, France

Asociación Nicaragüense para la Integración Comunitaria (ASNIC), Nicaragua

Aspire, UK

Assistive Technology Industry Association, USA

Association for Progressive Communications (APC)

Austrian association supporting the blind and visually impaired, Austria



B



BAPU Trust for research on mind and discourse, India

Barbados, (Telecommunications Unit of the Government of)

Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Russia

Best Buddies, Mexico

BlackBerry, Canada

Bogo City (Government of), Philippines

Bolivia (Viceministerio de Telecomunicaciones)

Bulgarian Paralympic Association, Bulgaria





57




C



Captioning International

Captioning Working Group, New Zealand

Cedat85, Italy

Center for Accessible Information, USA

Center for Ambient Intelligence and Accessibility of Catalonia (CAIAC), Spain Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing – BMSTU, USA Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), India Centre for Internet and Society (CIS), India

Centro d’Ateneo per la disabilita’ e l’integrazione, Research & Service Center about Disability, Universita di Padova, Italy

Centro de Vida Independente (CVI), Brazil

China Handicap Fund, China

Code Factory, Spain

Communication, Access, Literacy, Learning (CALL), Scotland Conseil Français des Personnes Handicapés pour les questions Européennes (CFHE), France

Coordinadora Nacional de Organizaciones de Limitados Visuales (CONALIVI), Colombia

Côte d’Ivoire (E-Handicap Project of the Government of) Creative Centre Trust, Cook Islands



D



Dipartimento di salute della donna e del bambino, Università di Padova, Italy Diplomatt, Kenya

Disability Center and Hospital of Padua’s University, Italy Diverse Disability Media, USA

DIY Ability, USA





58




E



EcoSynergy Group, New Zealand

Egypt (government of)

Enabling Unit, India

Estudiantes o Trabajadores Ciegos y Debiles Visuales del Estado de Veracruz, A.C.

(ETCDVEV), Mexico

European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education

European Federation of Hard of Hearing (EFHOH)

European Hearing Instrument Manufacturers Association (EHIMA)



F



Federal Communications Commission (FCC), USA

Fédération Handicap International / Programme du Burundi

Federation of Tunisian Organizations of Persons with Disabilities (FATH), Tunisia

Fundación ONCE, Spain

Future Hope, Ghana



G



Geneva-Kurisaki Market Intelligence Lab, Switzerland

Global Wire Associates (GWA), USA

GSA InfoComm, Australia





I




IBM, UK

Informatici Senza Frontiere, (Computer Scientists with no Borders), Italy

Institut Méditerranée du Littoral, France

Institut supérieur des études technologiques en communications de Tunis (ISET’Com),

Tunisia





59




Institute for Advanced Studies in Communications (Iecom), Brazil Institute on Disabilities, Temple University, USA

Instituto Superiore della Comunicazioni e delle Techologie, Italy International Center for Disability Resources on the Internet (ICDRI), USA International Federation of Hard of Hearing (IFHOH) Internet Society, Kenya

Internet Society, Pacific Region

ITU Development Bureau

ITU Radiocommunication Bureau

ITU Standardization Bureau



K



Kenya College of Accountancy (KCA), Kenya

Kenyatta University, Kenya



L



Lucy Tech, Switzerland



N



National Agricultural Research Organisation Uganda (NARO), Uganda National Confederation of Disabled People (ESAEA), Greece National Council for the Blind of Ireland (NCBI), Ireland National Institute of Speech and Hearing, Egypt

National Institute of Speech & Hearing (NISH), India National University of Colombia, Master in Handicap and Social Inclusion, Colombia Neil Squire Society, Canada

Norway Post and Telecommunications Authority, Norway





60




O



Information Technology Authority, Sultanate Of Oman



P



Paris City Council, France

Polytechnic Institute of Ecuador, Ecuador



R



Raising The Floor International

Real Time Reporting, Italy



S



Samarthyam National Center for Accessible Environments, India

SAMENA Telecommunications Council, UAE

Saudi Arabia (Universal Access for Individuals with Disabilities Program of the

Government of)

Special Educational Solutions - Special Educational Systems, Cyprus

Support Center for Inclusive Higher Education (SIHO), Belgium



T



Telecentre.org Foundation, Arab Region

Telefonica, Spain

Telekom Austria Group, Austria

Texas (Information Department of the government of), USA

The Trust for the Americas, Organization of American States

Tunis University, Tunisia

Tunisian Association of E-Accessibility, Tunisia





61




U



Uganda (Meteorological Department of the government of) Ukraine (Inclusive Libraries Project)

UNESCO Office in Beijing, China

UNESCO Office in Beirut, Lebanon

UNESCO Office in New York, USA

UNESCO Communication and Information Sector

UNESCO Education Sector

Unión Latino-Americana de Ciegos

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), China

University de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), Portugal University of Macerata, Master in Accessibility to Media, Arts and Culture, Italy University of Maribor, Slovenia

US Department of Education - Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, USA

US Department of State, USA





V




Vision Sense, UK



W



WhatSock, USA

WK Media, Kenya

World Blind Union

World Federation of the Deaf, Expert Group on Accessibility and Technology World Intellectual Property Organization





62




abOut



The Broadband Commission for digital the State of Georgia, USA, and headquartered

development is an initiative set up by ITU and in Atlanta. More information about the G3ict is

UNESCO in response to UN Secretary-General available at www.g3ict.org Ban Ki-Moon’s call to step up efforts to meet the

Millennium Development Goals. Launched in The International disability Alliance (IdA) May 2010, the Commission comprises govern- is a network of global and regional organiza-

ment leaders from around the world and the tions representing persons with disabilities. The

highest-level representatives and leaders from aim of IDA is to promote the effective and full

relevant industries and international agencies implementation of the UN Convention on the

and organizations concerned with development, Rights of Persons with Disabilities worldwide,

providing a fresh approach to UN and busi- as well as compliance with the CRPD within

ness engagement. To date, the Commission has the UN system, through the active and coordi-

published two High-Level policy reports, as well nated involvement of representative organiza-

as a number of best practices and case studies. tions of persons with disabilities at the national,

More information about the Commission is regional and international levels. IDA with its

available at www.broadbandcommission.org unique composition as a network of the foremost

international disability rights organizations is

The Global Initiative for Inclusive Infor- the most authoritative representative voice of

mation and Communication Technolo- persons with disabilities and acknowledged as

gies (G3ict) is an advocacy initiative of the such by the United Nations system both in New

UN Global Alliance for ICT and Development, York and Geneva. More information about IDA

launched in December 2006 in cooperation is available at www.internationaldisabilityalli-with the Secretariat for the Convention on the ance.org/en Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Its mission is

to facilitate and support the implementation of The International Telecommunication the dispositions of the Convention on the acces- Union (ITU) is the leading United Nations sibility of Information Communication Tech- specialized agency for telecommunications/

nologies and assistive technologies. G3ict relies ICT. Its membership, comprised of 193 govern-

on an international network of ICT accessibility ments, over 700 private companies and more

experts to develop and promote good practices, than 50 academic institutions, has called for

technical resources and benchmarks for ICT ITU to take the lead in promoting ICT acces-

accessibility advocates around the world. It is sibility, as well as to promote the use of ICTs

incorporated as a non-profit organization in as a key enabler to achieve the socio-economic





63




inclusion of persons with disabilities in all and services. The Foundation promotes the

aspects of life. ITU is based in Geneva, Swit- establishment and sustainability of grassroots

zerland, with 12 field offices around the world. level telecentres which are public places of access

More information about ITU’s activities in this to the Internet and other digital technologies.

domain is available at www.itu.int/accessibility These telecentres enable personal and social

development through the provision of crucial

Microsoft is a worldwide leader in software, services, skills and opportunities to people

services and solutions that help people and busi- living in remote and rural locations around the

nesses realize their full potential. The mission world. More information on the Telecentre.org

and values at Microsoft are to help people and Foundation is available at: www.telecentre.org businesses throughout the world to realize

their full potential. The mission statement is a UnEsCO is the only United Nations special-promise to the customers. Microsoft delivers on ized agency for education, science, culture,

that promise by striving to create technology communication and information since its crea-

that is accessible to everyone—of all ages and tion in 1945. UNESCO works towards creating

abilities. Microsoft is one of the industry leader the conditions for peace and dialogue among

in accessibility innovation and in building prod- civilizations, cultures and peoples, based upon

ucts that are safer and easier to use. Microsoft respect for commonly shared human values.

takes a strategic approach to accessibility by The access to accessible information using

focusing on integrating accessibility into plan- ICT for marginalized social groups, includ-

ning, design, research, development, testing, ing persons with disabilities, is fully incorpo-

and documentation. More information is avail- rated in the UNESCO’s strategic documents.

able at www.microsoft.com/enable/microsoft/ UNESCO believes that the promotion and

mission.aspx recognition of universal human rights and

providing access to information and knowl-

Telecentre.org foundation’s mission is to edge, particularly through innovative use of

increase the social and economic impact of ICTs media and ICTs, are conducive to ensure that

around the world by leading the global telecen- every citizen, including persons with disa-

tre movement towards innovation, relevance bilities, could better contribute to social and

and sustainability; serving as a hub for knowl- economic development. More information about

edge sharing and collaboration among telecen- UNESCO’s activities in this domain is availa-

tres and ICT4D stakeholders while creating ble at www.unesco.org/new/en/communica-opportunities for individuals and communities tion-and-information/access-to-knowledge/

through relevant training, content, linkages access-for-people-with-disabilities





International Telecommunications Union




Place des Nations - 1211 Geneva, Switzerland

Printed in Switzerland, Geneva

September 2013

Photo credits: Shutterstock

www.itu.int/accessibility





