Inclusive Customer Service Resource Manual for Vendors


[]

City of Brampton

Vendor Accessibility Responsibilities 

[]

Alternate formats of this document are available upon request

Updated July 2022

Vendor Responsibilities 

All vendors including, but not limited to, contractors, third-parties, external service providers etc. are responsible for complying with the Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act (AODA) S.O. 2005, c. 11. (AODA).

 

Non-compliance: 

All vendors associating with the City of Brampton must make every effort to comply with all the requirements outlined in the AODA and any additional accessibility policies and resources that the City of Brampton may provide. 

If certain accessibility requirements cannot be met or if it is not practicable to do so, vendors must provide an explanation. The explanation must demonstrate why certain requirements cannot be met and vendors must also indicate what kind of action plan is in place to achieve compliance or details on how they are working towards compliance. The action plan, any related documents or follow up material can be sent to accessibility@brampton.ca for tracking purposes.

 

Legislated Responsibilities 

The AODA, was established in 2005 to develop, implement, and enforce accessibility standards. In 2011, the Integrated Accessibility Standards Regulation (IASR) Ontario Regulation 191/11 was introduced to set out requirements to ensure compliance with specific obligations, standards, timelines, and targets. 

 

It is the responsibility of the vendor to understand which requirements are applicable to their business, organization, and/or entity.

 

The IASR consists of specific requirements, including but not limited to the following standards: 

 

General Requirements 

-       Establishment of accessibility policies and plans

-       Accessible procurement processes

-       Self-serve kiosks

-       Training 

 

Information and Communications 

-       Accessible websites and web content

-       Accessible formats and communication supports

-       Feedback process

-       Emergency procedures, plans, or public safety information -   Educational and training resources and materials etc.

-       Training for educators

-       Producers of educational or training material

-       Public libraries

 

Employment 

 

-       Recruitment, assessment, or selection process

-       Notice to successful applicants

-       Informing employees of supports

-       Accessible formats and communication supports for employees

-       Workplace emergency response information

-       Documented individual accommodation plans

-       Return to work process

-       Performance management

-       Career development and advancement

-       Redeployment

Transportation 

 

-       Conventional and Specialized Transportation Service Providers, General

-       Conventional and Specialized Transportation Service Providers, Accessibility Plans

-       Conventional Transportation Service Providers, Technical Requirements

-       Specialized Transportation Service Providers

-       Other Transportation Services

-       Duties of Municipalities and Taxicabs

 

Design of Public Spaces 

-       Recreational Trails and Beach Access Routes, General

-       Technical Requirements for Recreational Trails

-       Technical Requirements for Beach Access Routes

-       Exceptions to the Requirements for Recreational Trails and Beach Access Routes

-       Outdoor Public Use Eating Areas

-       Outdoor Play Spaces

-       Exterior Paths of Travel

-       Accessible Parking

-       Obtaining Services

-       Maintenance

 

Accessible Customer Service 

-       Establishment of policies

-       Use of service animals and support persons

-       Notice of temporary disruptions

-       Training for staff, etc.

-       Feedback process required

-       Format of documents

 

Key Accessibility Considerations to Apply When Providing or Evaluating Products, Software, Technology Services or Facilities:  

For Products/Software/Technology  

 

•      Can the product, software or technology be used by someone:  -            In a seated position?

-       Using one hand, with limited upper body strength?

-       With limited fine motor skills?

-       With vision loss or low vision? - With hearing loss?

•      Does the product meet ergonomic standards?

•      Can the product/software/technology be customized or altered to meet unique needs?

•      Are instructions clear and easy to follow?

•      Are support resources and materials (e.g., manuals or training materials) available in accessible formats at no extra charge?

•      Is the technology or software WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines) compliant? 

 

For Services 

 

•      Does the service provider provide accessible customer service?

•      Can the service provider accommodate the needs of people of all abilities? 

•      Will the service provider use accessible technology, software, signage, audio and/or print materials? 

 

For Facilities 

 

•      Is accessible parking available and close to the barrier-free entrance?

•      Can someone using a mobility aid (e.g., wheelchair or walker) move around the facility?

•      Are signs placed at an accessible height?

•      Does the facility have emergency procedures to assist people with disabilities?

 

Tips on providing customer service to individuals with disabilities 

 

When interacting with individuals with disabilities, use the following points to guide you:

●  Always ask, “How can I help you?”  

●  Speak directly to the individual. If you cannot understand the individual, politely ask them to repeat or confirm via paraphrasing. 

●  Do not make assumptions about the type of disability a person has and what they can and cannot do. 

●  Do not touch assistive equipment such as wheelchairs, canes, etc.  

●  Be clear – use plain language and avoid jargon, internal terms, and acronyms when communicating. Keep it simple.

●  Welcome service animals and support persons in accordance with the AODA.

●  Be flexible - understand that not all methods of service will work for all individuals and that they may request information or service in an alternate format that works better for them. 

●  Speak clearly, do not finish the person’s sentences, and give them time to explain themselves. Repeat information back to the person to ensure you have understood what was said.

●  Allow customers to use their own personal assistive devices, or those which may be offered by the City of Brampton, while using City facilities or accessing City services.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For any further questions or concerns please contact the Accessibility Team at accessibility@brampton.ca
