




	Who Benefits from Accessible Technology - and How Great Is the Need?	3
	Accessibility 	 	 	 	4
	Accessibility and People-Centric Design 	 	 	6
	Accessibility and the Cloud 	 	 	 	8
	Accessibility in Education  	 	 	 	10
	An Association of Accessibility Professionals	12
	Implementing the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 	14
	Technology and Older Adults 	 	 	16
	Resources 	 	 	 	18




Types of disabilities and impairments

SPEECHDEXTERITYCOGNITIVE/
6-8 MILLION AMERICANSABOUT 2.9 MILLION INTELLECTUAL
(2-3%) have some PEOPLE IN THE UK
difficulty understanding (24% of disabled people)15.2 MILLION AMERICANS or using language 6have a dexterity disability 7ages 15+ (5%) have a cognitive or intellectual disability8 
Accessible technology can also benefit people with situational disabilities who are:

Read on to learn more about the need for accessible technology
Accessibility
As technology becomes increasingly important in day-to-day living-for work, commerce, and communication-it is vital that everyone, regardless of ability or age, be able to enjoy the benefits of the digital world. Accessible technology enables people to personalize the settings on their computers and other devices to make them easier to use. 
For many people with physical or cognitive impairments, accessibility features are what make computer use possible. For example, adjustable display settings and text-to-speech features benefit people who have low vision. Hands-free technology benefits those with mobility impairments who have difficulty using a keyboard or a mouse. Simplified visual displays and picture-to-speech features can make computer use easier for people who have cognitive impairments.
Accessible technology is also helpful to those who want to customize their computing experience to address temporary situational needs, such as a noisy environment or bright sunlight.

 Accessibility features make it easier for everyone to use technology and to personalize their computers to meet their needs and preferences. 
 For many people who live with physical or cognitive disabilities, accessibility features are what make computer use possible.
 Microsoft is committed to developing innovative accessibility solutions through four key areas of focus: product accessibility, leadership and awareness, innovation, and collaboration.
 Policymakers can support accessibility by enacting policies that promote people-centric design; pointing to voluntary, technology-neutral industry standards; and letting the marketplace determine the best balance of built-in features, services, and third-party technologies.In addition to built-in accessibility options that let people personalize their computer settings, accessible technologies also include assistive products, such as screen readers, magnifiers, and specialty keyboards. Innovative hardware and software products and built-in accessibility settings are essential tools for computer users who have visual, dexterity, speech, and other impairments, as well as those with situational limitations.
Microsoft Approach
Microsoft is committed to developing innovative accessibility solutions through four key areas of focus:

	PRODUCT ACCESSIBILITY	LEADERSHIP & AWARENESS	INNOVATION	COLLABORATION
Many Microsoft products have built-in accessibility and personalization options:
WINDOWS 8 works on touch-only devices and offers touch-compatible updates to accessibility features such as Narrator and Magnifier. The Windows 8 Ease of Access Center helps people manage an array of accessibility options.
OFFICE 2013 provides integration with Windows 8 accessibility features and offers other accessibility features, such as Read Mode in Word 2013 and the Accessibility Checker for documents, spreadsheets, and presentations.
OFFICE 365 offers keyboard accessibility and high-contrast modes, and it supports display modes that make the Word Web App and PowerPoint Web App accessible to screen readers.
Accessibility
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition
More than two decades ago, Microsoft began its leadership in the field of accessibility and its commitment to developing innovative accessibility solutions.  The company helps raise awareness by providing information about its accessibility offerings-including demos, tutorials, and guides-on the Microsoft Accessibility website and in the Microsoft Accessibility Update newsletter.

	Microsoft Accessibility website	Microsoft Accessibility Update newsletter
Microsoft promotes accessibility innovation in the development community and works with industry organizations to advance accessibility. The Microsoft Accessibility Developer Center provides tools and guidance for developing accessible applications and web content. Microsoft engages in accessibility-related research and development projects, including large-scale nationwide studies and targeted usability studies. 
Microsoft collaborates with a wide range of organizations to help raise awareness of the importance of accessible technology. Microsoft has built strong relationships with organizations such as G3ict, UNESCO, Trust for the Americas, and national disability groups in many countries.
Policy Considerations
Governments and policymakers can help encourage the development of accessibility solutions by supporting the following priorities:
Accessibility and 
People-Centric Design
The technology industry has been investing in new, more natural ways for people to interact with technology. Devices and services are behaving in increasingly intelligent ways by anticipating users' needs, understanding their intentions, and adapting to their immediate surroundings.

 Advances in technology are enabling more personalized and relevant experiences for users. This approach-known as people-centric design-helps  everyone, including people with disabilities, use computing devices and services more easily. 
 People-centric design greatly expands the ways people can interact with products, services, and devices-to include voice commands, touch, and gestures.
 Microsoft believes that natural user interfaces, machine learning, scenario-based engineering, and other elements of people-centric design will not only expand opportunities for people with disabilities, but will also help a broad range of users who have temporary situational impairments.
 Government policies should encourage market-driven advances in people-centric design that emphasize general outcomes and avoid narrowly prescriptive rules that can hinder innovation.This new approach, known as people-centric design, includes several key elements: 

Devices and services that combine all of these attributes can make interacting with a computer easier not only for people with disabilities and those with age-related impairments, but also for those with temporary constraints-such as drivers who cannot safely look at a device screen, or people who are in noisy environments where sounds are difficult to distinguish.
Accessibility and People-Centric Design
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition
Microsoft Approach
Microsoft believes that the opportunity is ripe for more people-centric innovation in devices and services. Given the right policy landscape, the new interaction paradigms can lead to a cycle of innovation that addresses key concerns for policymakers related to education, employment, public health, and more. These innovations will help expand opportunities for people who have disabilities and will also help a broad range of users who have temporary situational impairments.
Underlying this new wave of innovation is scenario-based engineering-a design process that looks at what users want to accomplish in specific situations and builds the technology to address those use scenarios.

Microsoft is committed to engaging with the accessibility community, policymakers, and the technology industry to promote this important trend in digital inclusion and incorporate people-centric design into the devices and services of the future. 
Policy Considerations
Policymakers can help foster a regulatory environment that is open to the advantages of people-centric design by adhering to the following principles:
ACCESSIBILITY AND THE CLOUDAccessibility and the Cloud
For people who live with disabilities-more than 1 billion people worldwide, according to a World Health Organization report-the ability to use computers and access the Internet can be crucial to being an active part of the workforce and of society as a whole. 
At the same time, it has become common for people to own multiple devices and to move among them throughout the day. A 2013 Pew Research Center study found that more than half of American adults have a smartphone and more than a third own a tablet computer. For users with impairments, it is important to have a uniformly accessible experience across all the devices they use.
MORE THAN HALF MORE THAN A THIRD 
of American adults own a tablet computer
have a smartphone

 For people with disabilities- including visual, dexterity, cognitive, and speech impairments-access to computing and the Internet starts with a personal device that offers accessibility settings and can customize the user experience.
 Microsoft envisions a world of accessible, connected devices that can understand and interpret users' needs, preferences, and immediate surroundings. This experience, in combination with cloud-based services, will allow preferences to follow users wherever they go and on whatever device they use.
 Policymakers should support existing standards for accessibility and cloud computing that encourage a vibrant, market-driven ecosystem of accessible devices, software, and services.The cloud can be helpful in this respect by serving as a repository of user preferences and settings, and by providing that information to cloud-connected devices. It can also provide a way to sync devices when those settings change. However, the physical device remains the key to delivering a personalized user experience. The device is where technological advances-such as machine learning and natural user interfaces that respond to touch, voice, vision, and gestures-are revolutionizing accessibility. Devices are adapting to, and even anticipating, users' needs.
As the population ages, and as assistive technologies and services become more sophisticated, technology companies must be allowed to continuously innovate and integrate machine learning, natural user interaction, and cloud services to advance digital inclusion.
Microsoft Approach
For more than 25 years, Microsoft has been introducing accessibility features into software products. These include options in the Windows operating system and other products that help users personalize the computer display, mouse, keyboard, and sound and speech settings. 
Microsoft has also worked closely with companies that specialize in accessibility products such as: 

	SCREEN READERS	MAGNIFIERS	SPECIALTY KEYBOARDS
Built-in accessibility features in personal computing devices include those that read text aloud, add captions to video, and allow hands-free entry of information using speech. For example, Microsoft first introduced Windows Speech Recognition in 2006 in Windows Vista. More recently, Microsoft added speech recognition technology to the Kinect motion-sensing device for Xbox. These tools make 
Accessibility and the Cloud
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition

hands-free, voice-activated commands possible for users, including those who have temporary injuries, permanent disabilities, or situational limitations that prevent them from using the keyboard or mouse.
These "building blocks" in mobile devices and personal computers foster the growth of a vibrant accessible technology ecosystem. They will also lead to increasingly intuitive and adaptive user interfaces, as well as complex capabilities such as data visualization and real-time simulation of 3-D environments. 
Microsoft envisions a world of accessible, connected devices that can understand and interpret users' needs, preferences, and immediate surroundings. This fully adaptive experience, in combination with cloud-based services, will allow preferences to follow users wherever they go and on whatever device they use. 
The key characteristics of these next-generation accessible devices include multi-modal interaction (including speech, touch, gesture, and eye gaze), contextual awareness (sensing factors such as ambient noise, lighting level, whether the user is in a car, and the user's mood), and the ability to be personalized for each individual.
In some scenarios, cloud-based tools can be helpful by adapting content, translating between languages, or using crowd-sourced services to improve the accessibility of photos, graphics, or webpages. However, there will continue to be a need for powerful assistive technology within each device in order to provide a consistent experience of the device and all its capabilities.
Policy Considerations
Policymakers can encourage growth of a market-driven accessible technology ecosystem for all users on all devices by focusing on the following priorities:



Microsoft provides a number of educational resources, including accessibility guides for educators, curriculum resources, teacher-training workshops on accessibility, and articles and videos about how students with disabilities are using technology to enhance their learning. 
Microsoft also supports the development of model policies that can help guide governments in making education more inclusive. One example is the Model Policy for Inclusive Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in Education, which was jointly developed by UNESCO and G3ict in 2013. This document supports educational practices that conform to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and includes policy guidance, strategic blueprints, and budgeting and funding advice.
Policy Considerations
Governments and education policymakers can help advance the use of accessible technologies in schools and promote innovation in inclusive education by focusing on these priorities:

An Association of Accessibility Professionals
As technology becomes an increasingly vital part of everyday life, more devices, services, and software now incorporate accessibility features. But innovation in this area has been piecemeal, and accessibility remains an afterthought for many organizations that rely on or produce technology, for a number of reasons: 
		The adoption of accessible technologies has 

Key Points
 The technology industry is working to address the needs of people with disabilities and temporary impairments, but many organizations are either unaware of the available accessibility tools or they lack the expertise to use those tools.
 Accessibility has been advanced primarily by self-taught practitioners without the benefit of internationally recognized standards, professional certifications, or a pipeline of university-trained developers and engineers with expertise in accessibility.
 Without an international community of trained accessibility experts who share a body of knowledge and can help educate businesses, it will be difficult to further advance the cause within the technology industry. 
 Microsoft is taking a leadership role in the formation of the International Association of Accessibility Professionals (IAAP), which aims to transform accessibility from a grassroots effort into an inter- nationally recognized profession. mainstream value generated by investments in 	been hindered by the cost and complexity of accessibility features and technologies.	integrating them into existing devices and software, and there are limited venues for professionals to share information or offer peer support.
		There are no internationally accepted 
institutions that want to make their devices, 	professional standards or curricula related to services, and software accessible have 	accessibility with which to guide and train difficulty finding designers and developers 	developers and engineers. with sufficient expertise in this area.
Microsoft Approach
The technology industry, accessibility advocates, and government leaders have been struggling for years to find more effective ways to encourage the development of innovative accessibility solutions in devices, services, and software. In 2011, Microsoft participated in a year-long study (with support from the U.S. Department of Labor's Office of Disability Employment Policy), whose findings support the conclusion that an international association of accessibility professionals would be a step in the right direction.
Microsoft is taking a leadership role in the formation of the International Association of Accessibility 
An Association of Accessibility Professionals
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition
Professionals (IAAP), which will provide the strategic leadership, global perspective, and sustained investment needed to transform accessibility into an internationally respected and recognized profession. The diverse array of founding members includes companies and organizations such as AT&T, Barclays, Scotiabank, Adobe, Hewlett-Packard, AbilityNet, and Ai Squared. 
The major goals of the organization are:
To create a globally recognized set of training materials related to accessibility. These could be organized as separate courses for business leaders, designers, developers, and other professions.
To create a global community of individuals and organizations that spreads awareness of the need for accessible technology and offers resources to support the accessibility profession.
To provide a global forum for accessibility professionals to share information, offer peer support, and track accessibility-related developments in technology and public policy.
To develop and administer one or more professional accessibility certifications and offer continuing education to help practitioners augment their expertise as the field evolves.
The IAAP's mission, strategic objectives, governance structure, and other details have been finalized, and the association plans to launch and begin accepting members in the spring of 2014. 
Policy Considerations
Policymakers can raise awareness of the need for accessible technology and encourage the development of resources for developers and engineers by focusing on the following priorities:
Implementing the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) is an international human rights instrument whose purpose is "to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity." As of late 2013, 158 countries had signed the treaty and 138 had ratified it. Parties are required to "adopt all appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures for the implementation of the rights recognized" in the treaty as well as to "take into account the protection and promotion of the human rights of persons with disabilities in all policies and programmes."
The CRPD includes accessibility of information and communications technology (ICT) as a prerequisite for people with disabilities to fully enjoy all human rights and fundamental freedoms. This is the first time that digital accessibility has been elevated as a requirement comparable to accessibility of other forms of information and communication, as well as accessibility of transportation and the physical environment. 
The CRPD specifically addresses equal access to ICT in Article 9, which states, in part:

Key Points
 About 15 percent of the global population lives with some form of disability, according to the World Health Organization.  
 The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) advances the rights of people with disabilities and includes digital accessibility as a prerequisite to enjoying all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
 Microsoft supports the effective implementation of the CRPD, and it works with industry trade groups and nongovernmental organizations to advance the goals of the treaty. 
 Governments should look to global best practices and globally harmonized standards in creating accessibility policies and programs that broaden digital inclusion.To enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate fully in all aspects of life, States Parties shall take appropriate measures to ensure to persons with disabilities access, on an equal basis with others, to the physical environment, to transportation, to information and communications, including information and communications technologies and systems, and to other facilities and services open or provided to the public, both in urban and in rural areas. [emphasis added]
Article 9 further states that parties "shall also take appropriate measures to...[p]romote access for persons with disabilities to new information and communications technologies and systems, including the Internet."
In defining "discrimination on the basis of disability" and "reasonable accommodation," Article 2 of the treaty states:
"Discrimination on the basis of disability" means any distinction, exclusion or restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field. It includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable accommodation;
"Reasonable accommodation" means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Although ICT is not specifically mentioned in these definitions, it is integral to political, economic, social, cultural, and civil engagement, including participation in education and the workplace.
Implementing the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition
Microsoft Approach
Microsoft strongly supports effective implementation of the CRPD by governments that have signed and ratified it. Microsoft also collaborates with industry trade groups and other nongovernmental organizations to advance the broad deployment of accessible technologies and products. 
One example of such collaboration is the Microsoft partnership with six leading international organizations to encourage the UN to consider disability and accessible technology explicitly in its future development plans. The partnership produced a report, "The ICT Opportunity for a Disability-Inclusive Development Framework," which serves as a roadmap for broad digital inclusion that includes persons with disabilities around the world. In addition to Microsoft, the partners were the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, the Global Initiative for Inclusive ICTs (G3ict), International Disability Alliance, International Telecommunications Union (ITU), Telecentre.org Foundation, and UNESCO.

Microsoft also promotes accessibility and personalization in its products and services. For example, Windows 8 can be used on touch-only devices. And, like Office 2013, it includes touch-friendly accessibility features such as Narrator and Magnifier. Office 2013 also includes the Accessibility Checker, which helps users create an Office document that someone with a disability can easily read and access.
Policy Considerations
Governments and policymakers can advance effective implementation of the CRPD by focusing on these priorities:
ACCESSIBILITY AND THE CLOUDTechnology and Older Adults
Older adults are increasingly embracing the digital world. According to a Pew Research Center study, as of February 2012, one-third (34 percent) of Internet users age 65 and older use social networking sites such as Facebook, and 18 percent do so on a typical day. As more people use computers and interact online, it is increasingly important that technology be accessible to everyone, regardless of age or ability level.  

 As people age, vision, hearing, and dexterity impairments can affect their computer use. Tools and features that address these issues and allow personalization can make it easier and more comfortable for older adults to see, hear, and use their computers and other devices.
 Microsoft helps address the computing needs of older adults by building accessibility features into its products, offering training resources, and collaborating with organizations that help older adults use technology to maintain independence, productivity, connectivity, and enjoyment. 
 Microsoft offers educational resources about safety and security to help older adults learn how to use computers more proficiently, avoid online scams, and make their computers more secure.
 Microsoft supports the work of governments to help promote digital inclusion, ensure technology neutrality, and promote interoperability among accessible technology products. 34% of Internet users age 65 and 	18% do so on a typical day older use social networking sites such as Facebook
By age 50, many people have vision, hearing, or dexterity impairments that can affect their use of technology. For example, persons with low vision may have difficulty seeing default screen fonts or may experience increased visual fatigue. Those with discomfort in their hands and arms may have difficulty typing or using a mouse for long periods. 
Accessibility options and assistive technologies can help these users improve their computer experience by enabling them to adjust display, mouse, keyboard, sound, and speech options. Education and training can help older adults learn how to use computers more proficiently, avoid online scams, and make their computers more secure by installing antivirus software and setting up automatic updates.
Microsoft Approach
Microsoft is committed to making the benefits of technology and the digital world available and accessible to people of all ages through products, training, and collaboration.
Many Microsoft products include options that promote accessibility and personalization. For example, older people with vision impairments can benefit from the Narrator and Magnifier tools in Windows 8 and the various display features in Office 2013.
Technology and Older Adults
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition

Microsoft provides training through tutorial materials and participation in events and conferences:
		THE MICROSOFT DIGITAL 	THE MICROSOFT SAFETY 
ACCESSIBILITY WEBSITE 
provides demos, tutorials, and guidance on how to make computers easier to see, hear, and use. LITERACY PROGRAM 
helps novice computer users become proficient in basic computing skills. & SECURITY CENTER 
provides guidance for safer 
Internet use. Brochures such as "Stay Safer on the Internet" include advice specifically for older computer users. Microsoft collaborates with organizations such as AARP and SeniorNet to better understand and meet the needs of older adults. Microsoft also partners with governments, standards organizations, and the technology industry to help shape policy and solve shared challenges in making technology easier to use. 
Policy Considerations
Governments can help advance digital inclusion for older adults by promoting the following policies:
		Resources
GENERAL
Microsoft Accessibility: www.microsoft.com/enable Microsoft Accessibility Update newsletter:        
     www.microsoft.com/enable/news/subscribe/default.aspx
Microsoft Safety & Security Center: www.microsoft.com/security
Microsoft Digital Literacy program: www.microsoft.com/digitalliteracy
Russia-U.S. Bilateral on Cybersecurity: Critical Terminology Foundations:      
     www.issuu.com/ewipublications/docs/russia-us-terminology/1?e=9392629/5358103
ACCESSIBILITY IN EDUCATION
Microsoft Accessibility in Education: www.microsoft.com/enable/education
ACCESSIBILITY PROFESSIONALS
International Association of Accessibility Professionals: www.accessibilityassociation.org
Assistive Technology Industry Association: www.atia.org
ACCESSIBILITY AND OLDER ADULTS
Microsoft Accessibility Guide for Individuals with Age-Related Impairments: 
     www.microsoft.com/enable/aging
SeniorNet: www.seniornet.org
GLOBAL INITIATIVES AND PARTNERSHIPS
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities:   
     www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=259 
e-Accessibility Policy Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities: www.e-accessibilitytoolkit.org
Global Initiative for Inclusive ICTs (G3ict): www.g3ict.org
Trust for the Americas: www.poeta-accesible.org
Resources
Building Global Trust Online, 4th Edition
























































4 

	Accessibility	 3



	Accessibility	 3





	Accessibility	 3

	Accessibility	 3



	Accessibility	 3





4 

4 



4 





Accessibility 11

Accessibility 11



Accessibility 11





12 

Accessibility 13



12 





12 

17



17

























