Procurement of ICTs for Inclusive Education:  Guide for Engaging ICT Vendors  
Introduction 
This document was created by G3ict - The Global Initiative for inclusive ICT - to help education system institutions of all levels (e.g. schools and school districts, municipal and regional education authorities, education resource centers, ministries of education and other related ministries) to integrate accessible information and communication technologies (ICT) into their policies and practices. The goal is to ensure that these institutions are well equipped to move toward a stronger commitment to making accessibility a part of their ICT procurement, including by having more productive engagements about digital inclusion with technology vendors. This Discussion Guide will help education system institutions prepare for those engagements. The Guide, and its companion, the 9 Steps to Procuring Accessible ICTs for Inclusive Education, is one of several resources that G3ict and its partners have developed to support inclusive education worldwide.  
The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) recognizes the accessibility of ICTs both as a human right (Article 9) and as an enabler of other human rights. Article 24 requires states to ensure an inclusive education system at all levels. 177 countries worldwide have signed on the CRPD. Many national and local laws, regulations, and policies align with these CRPD commitments as well with globally relevant ICT accessibility standards, such as  EN 301 549 (EU); Section 508 of Rehabilitation Act of 1973(United States) technical requirements and WCAG 2.0/ISO/IEC 40500 (2013). In early 2018, the W3C released an updated version of that standard, WCAG 2.1.  
 For ICT, accessibility is generally accepted as being the quality of a mainstream technology such as a computer, mobile phone, self-service kiosk, or piece of software, to be used by the widest range of users possible, regardless of their abilities or disabilities. Accessibility makes it easier for anyone to see, hear, and use a device and to customize their digital environment according to their own preferences, needs, and abilities. Interoperability between the built-in access features and add-on accessible technologies is needed to ensure accessibility for a full range of individuals with disabilities. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) recognizes the accessibility of ICTs both as a human right (Article 9) and as an enabler of other human rights. 177 countries worldwide have signed on the CRPD. 
 ICT for inclusive education reflects the same principles. It supports providing equally effective access for learners of all abilities to mainstream technologies through features and enhancements that allow for personalization, and through assistive technologies that compensate for difficulties in accessing and using mainstream technologies. ICT for inclusive education also supports access to digital learning content and instructional delivery systems, library research, teacher/student communications, etc. Addressing the ICT accessibility needs of learners with disabilities can be achieved more cost effectively by considering them in the earliest stage of the procurement and development process. Both the World Declaration on Education for All and the Salamanca Statement And Framework For Action On Special Needs Education embrace principles on inclusive education. 
 Public procurement policies set the expectations, criteria, and limits for how goods, services, and infrastructure development will be purchased. Public procurement processes have gained increased attention as an effective policy tool to promote the accessibility of ICT equipment, software, applications, and services purchased by governments or government-funded programs, including by education system institutions of all levels. It is common practice today for governments to promote ICT privacy and security by including them as part of their procurements. ICT accessibility can be added as a priority in a similar way. 
 Globally relevant accessibility standards such as EN 301 549 (EU), WCAG 2.0/ISO/IEC 40500 and the technical requirements of Section 508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act are commonly referenced as criteria in RFPs. Many ICT providers design and develop their products and services to meet these criteria. It is a common practice for governments to request that vendors provide accessibility conformance reports that demonstrate how they meet these standards. 
 
The Discussion Guide  
The Institutional Imperative  
 In today's world education system institutions are responsible for creating equal access to education and provision of equal quality training and instructions to all learners of all abilities by creating an inclusive environment. And it relates not only to learners with physical/visible disabilities, but also those with cognitive and learning disabilities, as well as those with hidden or temporary disabilities (due to injury, illness, fatigue, etc.), and even non-native language speakers.  
 Due to the rapid building of digital society, the education system is responsible for equipping every learner with necessary skills.  
The Role of Technology Vendors  
 Education system institutions worldwide, whether schools, school districts, or education ministries, rely heavily on ICT vendors for products, services, and expertise. Often, that reliance extends to objectives and even legal requirements related to ICT accessibility and digital inclusion.  
 G3ict has heard from both education system institutions and technology vendors that engagements between the two often are not as productive and enlightening as they might be. Many education system institutions have a low awareness about ICT accessibility and could benefit from deeper and more structured discussions with technology vendors.  
 Many technology vendors have a strong commitment to accessible products and services but are not able to link these to the specific goals and strategies of education system institutions.  
This Discussion Guide was developed to help education system institutions engage technology vendors in a more productive manner in a discussion on the topics of ICT accessibility and digital inclusion and ultimately supporting a more inclusive education system where every learner reaches his/her maximum potential.  
Preparing for discussions with vendors  
To maximize the value of ICT investments, education system institutions can prepare for engaging with technology vendors with the following considerations: 
 When - Discussions with technology vendors about ICT accessibility and digital inclusion often take place during the procurement process - either at the stage of a market research or during the evaluation of responses to a Call for Tender/Request for Proposal. Education system institutions can take these steps prior to engaging in discussions with vendors:  
o Identify key internal stakeholders that should be aware of and contribute to discussions with vendors o Raise awareness internally about accessible ICTs for education and the role they play o Assess the education system institution's current use of and need for accessible ICT 
o Assess the current and potential accessibility needs of students and staff o Do research to get a sense for what the market has to offer and to explore how other governments and education ministries have deployed accessible ICTs to benefit learners 
o For more details on steps to ensuring that accessibility is part of the ICT procurement process, see the G3ict tool 9 Steps to Procuring Accessible ICTs for Inclusive Education and additional resources listed below. 
 Who  
o Officials of the Ministries of Education or other relevant Ministries on national and state level, procurement officers, teachers, administrators, CIOs/IT personnel, academic excellence specialists, accessibility specialists, etc. can form a working group, share their knowledge and vision for and contribute to a procurement process that results in a learning environment that benefits everyone;  
o Accessibility specialists, teachers, therapists who request accessible tools for end users and IT personnel responsible for 
   ICTs deployment should play an important part in procurement decision-making; o Students and staff with accessibility needs. 
 What - Meet with ICT vendors and discuss how to create an inclusive learning environment. Below are questions that education system institutions can raise with technology vendors about ICT accessibility and digital inclusion and important points to look for in vendor responses. Getting this information will help you make the best purchasing decision. Sharing the questions with vendors prior to the meetings will allow them to come fully prepared and aware of the topics of interest. Note that the possible replies listed with each question below reflect how a vendor with a high level of accessibility maturity might respond. 
 
Questions for a meaningful discussion with ICT vendors 
No Discussion topic  How Leading ICT Vendors Might Answer...  Corporate Commitment to Accessibility and Internal Processes  1 How do your company's structure and policies support a comprehensive commitment to accessibility and inclusion?  Have an explicit internal corporate policy regarding the accessibility and inclusion of their products and internal operating procedures to support that policy; 
 Have the active engagement of higher executives on accessibility topics;  Consider accessibility a competitive advantage and business opportunity;  Include accessibility as a requirement in their compliance and social responsibility processes;   Have dedicated accessibility professionals such as a Chief Accessibility Officer, corporate accessibility team, developers and program managers within business groups responsible for accessibility;  Has reputation for working externally with end users and customers to gather feedback and influence product roadmaps;  Have an internal philosophy of inclusion and helping every person to reach his/her maximum potential and make accessibility an integral part of that philosophy;   Demonstrate commitment to people with disabilities as part of diversity and inclusion for their own employees, including through hiring policies and employment programs. 2 What kind of experience does your company have in producing accessible technology?  Have experience making their products accessible, can explain what actions they take to meet the requirements and able to share the roadmaps or process guidelines;  Aware of commonly used accessibility technical standards and their relevance to policy and market requirements in different countries and regions;  Can offer examples of how they meet various accessibility standards and requirements;  Aware of inclusive/universal design principles and implements them in the development process;  Can offer examples of how they collect and work with user feedback to improve usability. 
3 What specific development processes in your company ensure the accessibility of your products?  
 Have a process to ensure that the newly released products are designed and developed to be accessible;  
Can explain how standalone apps may provide specific additional accessibility functionality work in cooperation with their accessible products;  Have an internal accessibility standard or guide based on global accessibility standards that is required in the development of all products and services;  Have a dedicated team or individuals available to consult with product developers to ensure that products can be used by the broadest range of users possible;  Have accessibility specialists focused specifically on the education market;  Have channels for getting feedback from individual users with disabilities, employees with disabilities and external customer, as part of the development process.  Accessibility Testing & Conformance  4 How do you test the accessibility of your products and demonstrate conformance with accessibility requirements and global accessibility standards?  Publish accessibility conformance statements for how products meet global accessibility standards, such as EN 301 549 (EU), Section 508 of Rehabilitation Act of 1973(United States) technical requirements and WCAG 2.0/ISO/IEC 40500;   Provide a channel for purchasers to make inquiries about results of conformance statements;  Use additional testing protocols to validate accessibility, e.g. code-based testing approaches for accessibility compliance and conformity;  Cooperates with a network of organizations and/or institutions to test the accessibility of products;  Can describe how they include users with disabilities in usability testing or conduct tests against common user scenarios that include the needs of people with disabilities.  
 Deploying Products  5 How can your product be used to meet our specific 	accessibility 	needs 	and requirements?   Explain how mainstream technology is accessible by default for users with different disabilities, how accessibility features within mainstream technology are turned on and off in certain situations, and how assistive technology, which can be supplemental to mainstream technologies may benefit people with certain disabilities (e.g. visual or hearing impairments);  Share use cases that demonstrate how the product has been used by other organizations and users in similar situations and what did they achieve with its help (e.g. created accessible content for end users, ensured that all students have equal access to learning materials, met the needs of those with learning disabilities, helped to accommodate the learning needs of recent migrants and non-native speakers);  Provide insights and strategies to benefit all students without leaving anybody behind;  Demonstrate actual features as well as use cases and learning scenarios for institution staff, including accessibility specialists and teachers, who are better positioned to evaluate whether a product meets current accessibility needs and requirements (fully or partially). 6 Please describe how ICT accessibility can align with and help advance our broader educational goals and strategies. How can your product be used by a broad spectrum of users with any abilities?  
 Demonstrate how the products are non-stigmatizing and how learners with disabilities may use them to communicate and collaborate with other learners without making their disability apparent; 
Speak to how the products might also be used by learners who are not aware they have a disability or have a temporary disability due to injury, illness or fatigue;   Address how accessibility in ICT can benefit many learners, e.g. non-native speakers;   Point to how students of all abilities can empower themselves to take advantage of accessibility in products. 
7 To what extent is your product compatible with other ICTs?  Confirm compatibility with other ICTs already deployed in the education system institution, which may also contribute to maximizing the value of the investments.    8 How does accessibility affect the price of your product?   Explain how accessibility is an integral part of the product and doesn't increase the cost an education system institution would bear to ensure an inclusive education environment;  For products focused on making technologies accessible for people with certain disabilities, demonstrate what range of learners can use it.   	After 	Sales 	Support 	for 	Effective 
Deployment  9 How can we take full advantage of your product with respect to accessibility and inclusion? How can you support our deployment of your product?  
 Proactively detail how they support deployment by clients early in the procurement process rather than after the fact and how this support can be integrated into actual contract language;  
Realize that deployment and actual use of any ICT is a measurement of a successful procurement process;  Interested not solely in selling their products, but also in increasing deployment rate;  Provide online/offline consultations to an education system institution's IT staff, shares best practices, help to adapt purchased products to the accessibility and inclusion needs of clients. 10 How do you provide online/offline training and training materials?   Support education system institutions in taking full advantage of their investments into accessible ICT through the organization of training and guidance to all stakeholders, especially teachers but also staff, learners, and even parents;  Provide training materials on their websites and regularly refresh them;   Provide online and even offline training for end users to ensure that the product is successfully deployed and its full functionality is used for the benefit of all learners.  11 How do you support or participate in knowledge-sharing communities?   Create and support product specific knowledge-sharing communities where users of their products can share their experiences, use cases, scenarios, tips & tricks, and give or ask for advice;  Make themselves available to participate in NGO and third-party communities to educate the community and increase your organization's return on investments through the full-scale use of purchased products;  Help direct users to existing knowledge-sharing communities with which they work. 12 How do you collect customer feedback and use it?  Point to formal channels where customers with disabilities get support with products, including issues, accessibility questions and use of related assistive technologies;  Share the updates which were made to a product based on the users' feedback;  Have more than one way of collecting feedback and demonstrate how it is understood and used.  
Additional Resources 
This document was developed to align well with other inclusive education and accessible ICTs procurement tools developed by G3ict, its partners, and global experts. Please refer to the following: 
• Model ICT Accessibility Policy Report  
• Model Policy for Inclusive ICTs in Education for Persons with Disabilities  
• Smart Cities for All Guide to Adopting an ICT Accessibility Procurement Policy  
• e-Accessibility Policy Toolkit for Persons with Disabilities 
• Buy ICT for All portal  
• 9 Steps to Procuring Accessible ICTs for Inclusive Education 

| Page 
• US Department of Homeland Security's Trusted Tester Program.  
For more information about accessibility and technology please go to the G3ict and the International Association of Accessibility Professionals (IAAP) websites. Many technology vendors also have dedicated accessibility pages on their websites where you can find a range of related and helpful information. 
 
 
 
1 | Page 
 

1 | Page 
 

1 | Page 
 

10 
 

10 
 

10 
 

