Supporting Materials Catalog for Teaching Accessibility


Supporting Materials Catalog for Teaching Accessibility

 

Editor(s):        Teach Access 

Last Edited: February 2020  Draft 1.0

 

[]

 

What is this document

This document is a catalog of materials from multiple sources that have been found variously useful by diverse current teachers of accessibility in support of their teaching. 

 

Audience for this document

Those who teach computer science & related disciplines in ICT (information and communications technology), particularly at, but not restricted to, tertiary levels.

 

Suggested usage of this document

-          The materials have been categorized according to their principal contents.

-          Consider your teaching need in terms of the categories.

-          Review the available items in the category you are interested in according to your specific need or interest. 

-          Typically the materials listed are best used as supplements to or starting points for writing your own curriculum materials. 

-          Please consider sharing back your own materials to the community, including adaptations or refinements of the materials already listed here  let Teach Access know at curriculum-feedback@teachaccess.org. 

 

Notes:

1.      Occasionally the same item appears in more than one category, for convenience. 

2.      Some larger resources will include materials that are also listed separately here. 

3.      Categorization is subjective, so you may find helpful resources in another category.

4.      Since the list is manually maintained, there may be errors  longer term, we hope to make this community-maintained with potentially crowdsourced annotations. 

5.      Because a future version will be online, formatting is purposely kept simple for now. 

 

Contents format:

-           [Resource name  link] o Type: W                                              ( )  material in this resource? o Audience: W                                            ( )                                                          ? o       Summary: 1-                                                    o Source: W                                                       ? o Date: Last updated/checked (if known) o URL: Explicit URL for the Resource name  link

                o    More info: Where to get more information about this resource

 

Acknowledgement  

 

This compilation of resources is the result of many contributors across the Teach Access community. Special thanks to: the Teach Access Curriculum Task Force  David Chesney (who made the original compilation), Jiatyan Chen, Kate Sonka, and Mika Byar. We are also grateful for the comments and additions from many reviewers across the Teach Access University Task Force  including faculty from California State University Northridge (CSUN), Georgia Tech, Marshall University, Stanford University, University of Maryland, University of Michigan, University of Washington, and Utah State University. 

 

The materials referenced in this document have been shared by their originators for the benefit of the teaching community and everyone who has to interact with technology  thank you. 

 

 

Disclaimer  

 

Teach Access provides this compilation of resources that are considered to be potentially useful o ofe o and eache an ing o ai e hei den a a ene of acce ibili . S bjec i e

descriptions included in this document belong to diverse compilers and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Teach Access. Outside of those so-noted, Teach Access is not the author of these materials, and claims no association with nor makes any endorsement of these materials. Use of the materials referenced herein is subject to the assessment and decision of the reader alone. 

 

Teach Access provides this compilation of resources "as is". Teach Access does not provide any warranty of the contents whatsoever, whether express, implied, or statutory, including, but not limited to, any warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose or any warranty that the contents of the item will be error-free. In no respect shall Teach Access incur any liability for any damages, including, but limited to, direct, indirect, special, or consequential damages arising out of, resulting from, or any way connected to the use of the item, whether or not based upon warranty, contract, tort, or otherwise; whether or not injury was sustained by persons or property or otherwise; and whether or not loss was sustained from, or arose out of, the results of, the item, or any services that may be provided by Teach Access. 

 

 

[]

 

             

Contents (Categories) 

 

  ---------------------------------- ---------------------- -------
  Section                            Number of Resources    Page
  Curriculum – Early                 3                      6
  Curriculum – Senior                9                      7
  Platform – Web                     22                     9
  Platform – Android & Google        3                      15
  Platform – iOS & Apple             3                      16
  Platform – Windows & Microsoft     4                      17
  Platform – Other                   2                      18
  Standards, Rules & Regulations     3                      18
  Design & Universal Design          7                      19
  General Materials                  5                      21
  Other Materials                    5                      22
  ---------------------------------- ---------------------- -------

 

Total number of resources in this release: 66 

 

Categories Explanation 

 

Curriculum – Early  

Ready-to-use curricula, or relatively directly applicable pedagogical materials at early tertiary level. 

 

Curriculum – Senior

As Early, but beyond beginner tertiary level.

 

Platform-specific categories 

Supporting materials that can be applied pedagogically focused on more accessible design for the type of platform cited, including:

-          Accessible design for the world-wide web

-          Mobile device experience design (e.g. Android, iOS)

-          Desktop device experience design (e.g. Windows, OS X)

-          Other device design (e.g. game platforms, application-specific)

 

Standards, Rules & Regulations

Supporting materials covering standards, etc. that make formal (e.g. legal) requirements for accessibility.

 

Design & Universal Design  

Supporting materials covering more general user interface and human interaction design topics that address accessibility.

 

General Materials  

Very broad/comprehensive collections that may include individual items that could be categorized in one of the above categories, or that otherwise do not fit elsewhere but may still be helpful in teaching accessibility.

 

Other Materials 

Additional resources that may fit in future categories.                                                 

Contents (Simple List Only) 

Curriculum – Early (3 resources)

1.     Introduction to Engineering: Gaming for the Greater Good  University of Michigan

2.     EGR 110: First Year Design Project  University of Portland

3.     MOOCAP  Training Courses in Accessible Design  Stuttgart Media University/EU

Curriculum – Senior (9 resources)

4.     Capstone Course  University of Michigan

5.     6.811: Principles and Practice of Assistive Technology (PPAT)  MIT

6.     Universal Design of Web Pages in Class Projects  UW

7.     []Web Accessibility Course  S E          U        

8.     Web Design & Development I Curriculum  WebD2  UW

9.     Professional Web Accessibility Auditing Made Easy  eBook (free)

10.  Perspectives in Assistive Technology ENGR110/210  Stanford University

11.  COMP 485  Human-Computer Interaction

12.  ART 396 User Experience/User Interface Design

Platform – Web (22 resources)

13.  A Web for Everyone: Designing Accessible User Experiences

14.  InterACT with Web Standards: A holistic approach to web design, Anderson, et. al. 

15.  Web Accessibility Training & Advocating  W3C

16.  Web Accessibility Tutorials  W3C

17.  Accessibility Fundamentals Page  W3C

18.  Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI)  W3C

19.  Tutorial for Software Design  Teach Access 

20.  Web Fundamentals  Accessibility  Google/Udacity

21.  Web Accessibility  Google/Udacity

22.  Accessible University 3.0  Home Page Example  UW

23.  Accessibility for Web Design  Lynda.com Course

24.  WUHCAG  Checklists for WCAG

25.  WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices 1.1  W3C

26.  Inclusive Components  Pattern Library

27.  Web Accessibility for Designers  Cheatsheet

28.  Web Experience Toolkit (WET)  Government of Canada

29.  US Web Design System  US Government

30.  Assets Framework for Front-End Development  US Government

31.  Mindpatterns  Accessibility Patterns for the Web  eBay

32.  Accessible widget & pattern library  A11Y Project

33.  B                A         D         ( BAD )  W3C

34.  WebAIM Resources  Utah State University

Platform – Android & Google (3 resources)

35.  Android accessibility overview  Google 

36.  TalkBack Tutorial for Android  Google

37.  A11ycasts videos  Google

Platform – iOS & Apple (3 resources)

38.  Accessibility on iOS  Apple

39.  VoiceOver Tutorial for iOS  Apple

40.  T    E         T         B         F         C        

Platform – Windows & Microsoft (4 resources)

41.  Narrator Tutorial for Windows 10  Microsoft

42.  Developing Inclusive Windows 10 apps  Microsoft

43.  Accessibility at a Glance  Microsoft Video Series

44.  Microsoft Accessibility Homepage

Platform – Other (2 resources)

45.  Adobe Accessibility Guides

46.  Xbox Accessibility

Standards, Rules & Regulations (3 resources)

47.  WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines)  W3C

48.  GSA Section 508  US Government

49.  EN 301 549 Accessibility requirements for ICT products and services  CEN/CENELEC/ETSI

Design & Universal Design (7 resources)

50.  Promoting the Integration of Universal Design into University Curriculum (UDUC)  CU Boulder 

51.  Universal Design of Web Pages in Class Projects  UW

52.  Inclusive Design 24  Conference Videos

53.  Accessible UX Design Studio  TPG

54.  Dos and don'ts on designing for accessibility  UK Government

55.  Government Digital Service  UK Government

56.  Inclusive Design Toolkit  Microsoft

General Materials (5 resources)

57.  AccessComputing Resources  UW

58.  MasterList of Accessibility Strategies  Raising the Floor

59.  The DeveloperSpace  Raising the Floor

60.  The Unified Listing  Raising the Floor

61.  Accessibility Learning Labs (ALL)  RIT

Other Materials (5 resources)

62.  G Suite User Guide to Accessibility 

63.  Google AI

64.  Microsoft Office Accessibility Center

65.  Authoring Accessible Content with Microsoft Office 365

66.  Microsoft Cognitive Services

 

 

             

Contents (Full Details) 

Curriculum – Early (3 resources)

 

1.      Introduction to Engineering: Gaming for the Greater Good  University of Michigan o    Type: Course website, curriculum, project ideas o Audience: College (frosh) 

o    Summary: Gaming for the Greater Good  Freshman-level Comp Sci course that introduces the engineering process, then uses the process to design a game. A specific customer base (such as children on the autism spectrum) is identified, and games are explicitly developed for the intended audience. Games are developed using GameMaker, so no previous programming experience is necessary.

o    Source: University of Michigan  Krista Quinn, Dave Chesney o Date: N/A

o    URL: https://eng100.engin.umich.edu/list/sec650/ 

o    More info: chesneyd@umich.edu 

 

2.      EGR 110: First Year Design Project  University of Portland o Type: Project ideas o     Audience: College (frosh)

o    Summary: The challenge is designed to emphasize the essence of engineering and computer science; that is to solve a problem under a variety of constraints, attempting to meet criteria that are often conflicting, and to do so in association with colleagues who may have slightly different viewpoints than their own. Successful completion of the challenge will not only involve following through the design process from a conceptual design to a product, but also emphasize non-technical aspects of engineering. The process will involve innovative thinking, the design process, sketching, hands-on creation, technical writing and oral communication. To address accessibility, the challenge could be designing for an individual who has limited ability. 

o    Source: University of Portland

o    Date: Aug 2014

o    URL: http://faculty.up.edu/ainan/egr110Bf14designproject.pdf  o More info: http://teaching.up.edu/egr110/ 

 

3.      MOOCAP  Training Courses in Accessible Design  Stuttgart Media University/EU o Type: Online courses (11 resources) o Audience: Developers, Content creators

o    Summary: MOOCAP was a European project whose name stands for MOOC             

                        A                P                . T                                                                                             

design in ICT. They created 11 free online courses, four of which were MOOCs. The goal of these courses was to teach you how to create accessible media and content, such as web sites, mobile apps and office documents. In addition, you could learn about how to design products and systems for daily living in order to make them accessible to, understandable by and usable for a wide range of people. We provided both an introductory course and a few

                                                           . A                                                                 . T                                     

fictitious. The stories were created by the partners of the MOOCA project on the basis of extensive experience with these types of people. The stories are not meant to reach the same level of accuracy as personas, which should be based on data obtained from field

                             . L                    ,            MOOCA                       -in-the-life stories can be used to help designers and developers think about questions related to the development of ICT products and electronic documents. MOOCAP also uses them in a massive online open course (MOOC), so learners can develop empathy for people with disabilities. They include: Carole  blind; Maria  partially sighted; Alexander  color vision deficiency; Lars  deaf; Susan  hard of hearing; Mary  mobility and dexterity problems; Tom  speech impairment; Anna  dyslexia; Monika  elderly. 

o    Source: Stuttgart Media University/European Union

o    Date: Nov 2018 o    URL: https://moocap.gpii.eu/ 

o    More info: gzimmermann@hdm-stuttgart.de 

 

Curriculum – Senior (9 resources)

 

4.      Capstone Course  University of Michigan o Type: Course website, curriculum, project ideas o Audience: College (senior) 

o    Summary: Senior-level Comp Sci capstone course that develops software systems for a specific customer with an identified physical or cognitive disability. Topics of Individual Design, Universal Design, and Inclusive Design are discussed. Considerations for software system development for different disability classification (VI, HI, motor, cognitive) are also discussed. Curriculum is developed to follow multiple version release process throughout a semester. o     Source: University of Michigan  Dave Chesney o            Date: N/A

o    URL: https://chesneyd.engin.umich.edu/articles-media/ 

o    More info: chesneyd@umich.edu

 

5.      6.811: Principles and Practice of Assistive Technology (PPAT)  MIT o       Type: Capstone, Course website o         Audience: College (senior)

o    Summary: Course website from MIT on building software/assistive technology systems for specific client with a disability. PPAT is a 12-unit, interdisciplinary, project-based course in which small teams of students work closely with a person with a disability in the Cambridge area to design a device, piece of equipment, app, or other solution that helps them live more independently. Over the course of the term, each team meets with its "client," iterates through multiple prototypes, and learns about the challenges and realities of designing assistive technologies for people with disabilities.

o    Source: MIT  Teo, Li, Greenberg, Dusek, et al. o       Date: Fall 2015

o    URL: http://ppat.mit.edu/fall2015/index.html 

o    More info: ppat@mit.edu 

 

6.      Universal Design of Web Pages in Class Projects  UW o       Type: Project Ideas o       Audience: College (senior)

o    Summary: This publication is designed to give guidance to instructors of precollege and postsecondary web design courses as well as to those who, as an activity in their classes, have students create web pages. It describes options for integrating accessibility content within any course. References are made to ready-to-use publications online in PDF and alternate formats for duplication as handouts for your class. These materials can be used to develop the knowledge and skills of both instructors and students.

o    Source: University of Washington

o    Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.washington.edu/doit/universal-design-web-pages-class-projects  o More info: doit@uw.edu 

 

7.      []Web Accessibility Course  S E          U        

o    Type: Website (course) o Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: The class covers basic HTML and an introduction to ARIA (Accessible Rich Internet Application) techniques for creating accessible websites emphasizing the importance of separating content from presentation. Specifics include: Identify problems people may have when using the web; Understand how assistive technologies are used with the web; Learn how to apply WCAG 2.0 guidelines to a website; Identify basic testing tools;

Understand the importance of semantic structure; Learn how to use ARIA landmark roles; Learn how to create links that make sense out of context; Discover how to avoid problems with color and contrast; Learn to make images accessible; Learn about the benefits of using captions and differences between closed and open captions; Learn how to make data tables accessible; Learn basic techniques for making forms accessible. 

o    Source: S E            U        

https://support.stedwards.edu/customer/en/portal/articles/2567105-web-accessibility 

o    Date: N/A

o    URL: http://sites.stedwards.edu/accessibility/  o        More info: support@stedwards.edu 

 

8.      Web Design & Development I Curriculum  WebD2  UW o      Type: Website (curriculum) o          Audience: K12  Grades 9-12

o    Summary: The curriculum emphasizes standards-based and accessible design, is crossplatform and vendor-neutral, and is freely available for teachers to use in their own classrooms. o   Source: University of Washington  Joe McAuliffe, Don Helling, and Karll Rusch o    Date: Fall 2012

o    URL: http://www.washington.edu/accesscomputing/webd2/  o            More info: accesscomp@uw.edu

 

9.      Professional Web Accessibility Auditing Made Easy  eBook (free) o Type: Book (free  Creative Commons)

o    Audience: Web Developers, Content Creators, Designers

o    Summary: eBook covering WCAG and how to use free tool to test for accessibility. Essential Skills for Web Developers, Content Creators, and Designers. Digital accessibility skills are in high demand, as the world becomes more aware of barriers in digital content that prevent some people from participating in a digital society. These are essential skills for web developers, and essential knowledge for organizations that want to ensure their web content is reaching the broadest audience possible. Additional helpful Creative Commons eBooks from this source:

                                ▪      Web Accessibility for Developers: 

https://pressbooks.library.ryerson.ca/wafd/ 

                                ▪     Digital Accessibility as a Business Practice:

https://pressbooks.library.ryerson.ca/dabp/ 

o    Source: Digital Education Strategies, The Chang School o Date: Jun 2018

o    URL: https://pressbooks.library.ryerson.ca/pwaa/ 

                o    More info: N/A 

 

10.  Perspectives in Assistive Technology ENGR110/210  Stanford University o Type: Course website, newsletter, syllabus, curriculum, projects o Audience: Course is open for enrollment to all Stanford students

o    Summary: Perspectives in Assistive Technology is a course that explores the design, development, and use of technology that benefits people with disabilities and older adults. Students pursue individual or team projects to address a challenge or problem experienced

by this population of individuals in the local community. Class sessions consist of short modules related to assistive technology as well as guest lecturer presentations, field trips, a movie night, an Assistive Technology Faire, student project presentations & demonstrations.

o    Source: Stanford University - David L. Jaffe, Instructor o       Date: Current

o    URL: http://engr110.stanford.edu/ 

o    More info: davejaffe@stanford.edu

 

11.  COMP 485  Human-Computer Interaction o Type: Course website, Project ideas o Audience: College (senior/graduate)

o    Summary: This course is directed towards students who wish to learn the basic concepts and current research into the design, creation, and evaluation of computer interfaces. The course examines how human users interact with computer software and computer systems. The course module on accessibility includes two lectures followed by a design exercise. The first lecture starts with a key component missing in educating the next generation of technology developers - valuing human capabilities. The second lecture focuses on how to make accessible mobile content and interfaces supporting multiple modalities of interaction. It will explain why many fundamental accessibility best practices can be applied to mobile interfaces and content.

o    Source: California State University Northridge (CSUN)  Li Liu o         Date: Fall 2018

o    URL: https://catalog.csun.edu/academics/comp/courses/comp-485/  o           More info: lliu@csun.edu 

 

12.  ART 396 User Experience/User Interface Design o    Type: Course website, Project ideas o       Audience: College (junior/senior)

o    Summary: This mid-level course is for students in visual and graphic design areas, that covers research methodology and design-thinking processes for creating and prototyping

                                                                                    . T                                                                      

lectures followed by a design exercise. The first lecture starts with a key component missing in educating the next generation of technology developers - valuing human capabilities. The second lecture focuses on how to make accessible mobile content and interfaces supporting multiple modalities of interaction. It will explain why many fundamental accessibility best practices can be applied to mobile interfaces and content.

o    Source: California State University Northridge (CSUN)  Joseph Bautista o     Date: Spring 2019

o    URL: http://www.uixd.org/csun/art-396-ux-ui-design/  o          More info: joe.bautista@csun.edu 

 

Platform – Web (22 resources)

 

13.  A Web for Everyone: Designing Accessible User Experiences o       Type: Book

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: Approximately 1/3 of book available online for free, also check out Resources section of the site for personas, podcast, etc.

o    Source: Rosenfeld Media  Sarah Horton & Whitney Quesenberry o Date: Jan 2014

o    URL: https://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/a-web-for-everyone/  o         More info: shorton@paciellogroup.com 

 

14.  InterACT with Web Standards: A holistic approach to web design, Anderson, et. al.  

o    Type: Book

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: Starting with the basics this book teaches: Internet fundamentals, planning, content strategy, and information architecture, HTML and CSS, Accessibility.

o    Source: New Riders  Erin Anderson et al. 

o    Date: May 2010

o    URL: https://www.amazon.com/InterACT-Web-Standards-holistic-approach/dp/0321703529  o            More info: accesscomp@uw.edu

 

15.  Web Accessibility Training & Advocating  W3C o       Type: Website (tutorials and presentations) o          Audience: Teachers and advocates

o    Summary: Tutorials, demos, handouts, presentations, etc.  includes How to Make Your Presentations Accessible to All, Developing Web Accessibility Presentations and Training, Before and After Demonstration (BAD).  o Source: W3C  Shawn Lawton Henry

o    Date: Apr 2018

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/train 

o    More info: shawn@w3.org 

 

16.  Web Accessibility Tutorials  W3C o   Type: Website (tutorials and presentations) o      Audience: Web developers and more

o    Summary: This collection of tutorials shows you how to develop web content that is accessible to people with disabilities, and that provides a better user experience for everyone. The tutorials cover various accessibility topics, based on common tasks in web projects. For example, they show you how to provide accessible images and tables using a variety of web technologies, including HTML4, HTML5, CSS3, WAI-ARIA, MathML, and SVG. The concepts and techniques explained in the tutorials apply to other formats as well. The tutorials are designed to be used by a variety of individuals, including: Web developers will find guidance and boilerplate solutions for many common coding challenges; Web designers will learn how to create web page components with a built-in inclusive design; Web trainers will find examples to teach people about accessible web design and development; Content authors will learn concepts and techniques for preparing their content in an accessible way; Project managers will gain an understanding of ways to integrate accessibility into their projects. 

o    Source: W3C  Eric Eggert/Shadi Abou-Zahra o         Date: Sep 2017

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/ 

o    More info: shadi@w3.org 

 

17.  Accessibility Fundamentals Page  W3C o Type: Website (documentation and resources) o Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Intro to Accessibility; Examples of individuals using accessible or assistive technology. Accessibility in Context; What is Web Accessibility; Accessibility is Important for Individuals, Businesses, Society; Making the Web Accessible; Evaluating Accessibility; Examples and More Information. Everything in left sidebar of page, especially "Perspectives Videos" and "How People with Disabilities Use the Web". 

o    Source: W3C  Shawn Lawton Henry o         Date: Jan 2019

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-intro/  o       More info: shawn@w3.org 

 

18.  Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI)  W3C o      Type: Website (documentation and resources)

o    Audience: Web content developers (page authors, site designers, etc.), Web authoring tool developers, Web accessibility evaluation tool developers, Others who want or need a

standard for web accessibility, including for mobile accessibility

o    Summary: The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) develops international standards for the Web: HTML, CSS, and many more. The W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) develops standards and support materials to help you understand and implement accessibility. You can use W3C WAI resources to make your websites, applications, and other digital creations more accessible and usable to everyone. 

[Highlighted materials from this source are called out elsewhere in this list of resources.] o      Source: World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) o    Date: Current

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/  o      More info: https://www.w3.org/

 

19.  Tutorial for Software Design  Teach Access  o           Type: Website (tutorial) o   Audience: Teachers and advocates

o    Summary: Best practices for making accessible mobile and web apps. This tutorial currently provides basic training for developers and designers. Basic software best practices for accessibility with lots of self-driven exercises.  o            Source: Teach Access members o         Date: Mar 2016

o    URL: https://teachaccess.github.io/tutorial/  o            More info: http://teachaccess.org 

 

20.  Web Fundamentals  Accessibility  Google/Udacity o Type: Website (documentation/course) o    Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: This document set is a text-based version of part of the content covered in the Udacity course on Accessibility. Rather than a direct transcription of the video course, it is meant to be a more concise treatment of accessibility principles and practices, using the course's original content as a base. Specifics include: Learn what accessibility means and how it applies to web development; Learn how to make web sites accessible and usable for everyone; Learn how to include basic accessibility with minimal development impact; Learn what HTML features are available and how to use them to improve accessibility; Learn about advanced accessibility techniques for creating polished accessibility experiences.

o    Source: Google/Udacity o    Date: May 2019

o    URL: https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/accessibility/  o          More info: N/A

 

21.  Web Accessibility  Google/Udacity o Type: Course (online)  2 weeks o Audience: Web developers o Summary: I     -on experience making web applications accessible.

Y       . T     " ": making a page work properly with screen readers, and managing input focus (e.g. the

                                                                                                 .) Y                                "               "        

"semantic markup" mean for web pages and add ARIA (Accessible Rich Internet Application)

markup to enable navigating the interface with a range of as             . F        ,            learn styling techniques that help users with partial vision navigate your pages easily and reliably.

o    Source: Google/Udacity

Date: N/A o URL: https://www.udacity.com/course/web-accessibility--ud891  o More info: https://learning.udacity.com/advisor/ 

 

22.  Accessible University 3.0  Home Page Example  UW o Type: Website (example, documentation)

o    Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: Accessible University (AU) is a fictional university home page designed to demonstrate a variety of common web design problems that result in visitors with disabilities being unable to access content or features. AU was originally developed by AccessIT and is maintained by AccessComputing, both projects based out of the University of Washington. Use the AU site to demonstrate common web accessibility principles at trainings, presentations, and workshops on accessible web design; and learn common web accessibility problems and solutions in an easy-to-understand way.

o    Source: Access Computing (University of Washington) o Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.washington.edu/accesscomputing/AU/index.html  o More info: accesscomp@uw.edu

 

23.  Accessibility for Web Design  Lynda.com Course o Type: Online course (2hr)  requires subscription o Audience: Beginner

o    Summary: Are you doing everything you can to make sure your sites are accessible and easy to use? Learn practical accessibility techniques to ensure your web designs can be viewed and used by everyone. Internationally recognized accessibility expert Derek Featherstone walks through examples of common web interaction flows, and then steps through considerations and tactical strategies for each component, to assure that people with disabilities can easily complete those tasks. Learn the proper use of color, contrast, and motion, and find out how to design keyboard interactions and touch interfaces; incorporate images, sound, and video; design accessible forms; structure content at the tag level; and balance responsive design with accessibility.

Note: Other accessibility courses are available on Lynda.com and similar online course sites. 

o    Source: Lynda.com/LinkedIn o         Date: Jan 2018

o    URL: https://www.lynda.com/Web-Design-tutorials/Accessibility-Web-Design/606090-2.html  o More info: http://simplyaccessible.com/ 

 

24.  WUHCAG  Checklists for WCAG o Type: Support materials (checklists)

o    Audience: Web developers  Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced

o    Summary: I      WCAG 2.0       through the guidelines. A WCAG 2.0 checklist helps you to check your web accessibility

,         targets for the future. Wuhcag addresses     that means taking everything about your website into account.

                        There are three checklists, with links                                                . T                              

                        as PDFs via a book purchase. The checklists are organized by WCAG        . I            

                                                                              (                    ),                           L      A (B           )             

Level AA (Intermediate) and on to Level AAA (Advanced).

N    : P                               ,                        P         S                                  WCAG             : https://accessibility.psu.edu/wcag2/ 

o    Source: Luke McGrath o     Date: Jul 2018

o    URL: https://www.wuhcag.com/wcag-checklist/  o      More info: https://www.wuhcag.com/contact/ 

 

25.  WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices 1.1  W3C o    Type: Documentation o       Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices is a guide for understanding how to use WAI-ARIA 1.1 to create an accessible Rich Internet Application. It describes considerations that might not be evident to most authors from the WAI-ARIA specification alone and recommends approaches to make widgets, navigation, and behaviors accessible using WAI-ARIA roles, states, and properties. This document is directed primarily to Web application developers, but the guidance is also useful for user agent and assistive technology developers. It provides guidance on the appropriate application of WAI-ARIA, describes recommended WAI-ARIA usage patterns, and explains the concepts behind them. Languages used to create rich and dynamic web sites, e.g., HTML, JavaScript, CSS, and SVG, do not natively include all the features required to make sites usable by people who use assistive technologies (AT) or who rely on keyboard navigation. The W3C Web Accessibility Initiative's (WAI) Accessible Rich Internet Applications working group (ARIA WG) is addressing these deficiencies through several W3C standards efforts. The WAI-ARIA Overview provides additional background on WAI-ARIA, summarizes those efforts, and lists the other documents included in the WAIARIA suite.

o    Source: World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) o         Date: Feb 2019

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/  o More info: https://www.w3.org/

 

26.  Inclusive Components  Pattern Library o Type: Design Patterns walkthrough o Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: This is a very detailed walkthrough of common complex web interface patterns focusing on inclusive design. There is an associated book (for purchase). 

o    Source: Heydon Pickering o Date: Apr 2018 o URL: https://inclusive-components.design/  o More info: https://twitter.com/heydonworks 

 

27.  Web Accessibility for Designers  Cheatsheet o          Type: 1-page summary (Infographic, Text) o          Audience: Web designers (not developers)

o    Summary: The focus of web accessibility is often on web development  the things that happen in HTML, CSS, or JavaScript after a site has been designed visually. Optimal accessibility should start much earlier, as part of the visual design process. This is an infographic that highlights a few important principles of accessible design. WebAIM has additional resources available at their website. 

o    Source: WebAIM (Accessibility In Mind)/Utah State University o Date: 2016

o    URL: https://webaim.org/resources/designers/  o       More info: https://webaim.org 

 

28.  Web Experience Toolkit (WET)  Government of Canada o     Type: Pattern Library  Documentation, Downloads, Examples, Style Guide o    Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: An award-winning front-end framework for building websites that are accessible, usable, interoperable, mobile friendly and multilingual. It includes a collection of flexible and themeable templates and reusable components. Types of resources include documentation, downloads, examples, and a style guide. It arises from a collaborative open source project led by the Government of Canada, hosted in Github. Notably supports 34 different (human) languages, including right-to-left. 

Source: Government of Canada o Date: Jun 2016

o    URL: https://wet-boew.github.io/v4.0-ci/index-en.html  o         More info: https://github.com/wet-boew/wet-boew/issues/new 

 

29.  US Web Design System  US Government o Type: Pattern Library, Github o     Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: A design system for the federal government  design and build fast, accessible, mobile-friendly government websites backed by user research. Specific items include: Getting started  learn how to get started using the U.S. Web Design System for your project, regardless of your technical stack; UI components  discover all the different components

                                      D        S                                                                                   ; W                 keep

up to date with the current news and product development updates for the U.S. Web Design System; Page templates  explore the different page templates that have been created to jump start your product development.

o    Source: US Government o Date: Current

o    URL: https://designsystem.digital.gov/  o       More info: via Github

 

30.  Assets Framework for Front-End Development  US Government o Type: Code library, Github o Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: Assets gives you Section 508 compliant, cross-browser compatible UI components that you can use in your accessible web site or web application. Assets is an accessible, responsive, and modern framework. Specific features/items include: Mobile First Development, High Contrast Mode Tested, Section 508 Compliant Code, Keyboard Accessible, Availability through Content Delivery Network (CDN). 

o    Source: US Government o Date: Current 

o    URL: https://assets.cms.gov/resources/framework/3.4.1/Pages/  o     More info: via Github

 

31.  Mindpatterns  Accessibility Patterns for the Web  eBay o Type: Code/Pattern library o Audience: Web developers

o    Summary: This site contains all working examples for the book eBay MIND Patterns  Accessibility Patterns for the Web. The MIND Patterns are not a visual design system or CSS framework (à la Material Design or Bootstrap)  they are instead intended to complement those systems & tools with accessibility guidance. We have hopefully made this obvious enough with our very sparse and utilitarian use of style in these examples! Each pattern follows a progressive enhancement strategy (where applicable), aims to conform to WCAG 2.1 Level AA, and for the most part builds on from the excellent guidance set out in the WCAG Authoring Practices 1.1. These examples will assist the frontend developer with accessibility, but the source code is not considered to be final, production-ready code. Most examples leave additional steps to complete; typically any CSS styling and JavaScript behavior that is not specifically related to core functionality or accessibility. o Source: eBay o Date: May 2019

o    URL: http://ebay.github.io/mindpatterns/ 

                o    More info: N/A 

 

32. Accessible widget & pattern library  A11Y Project

Type: Code library, Github

Audience: Web developers o           Summary: Accessibility can be a complex and difficult topic. The Accessibility Project understands this and wants to help make it easier to implement on the web. Our goal is to accomplish this with three principles in mind: Digestible. We strive to feature short, digestible pieces of content. Up-to-date. The project is hosted on GitHub so information can be current with the latest standards. Forgiving. People make mistakes, so we seek to be encouraging. Additional resources are available at the website. 

o    Source: The A11Y Project o             Date: Current

o    URL: https://a11yproject.com/patterns/ 

o    More info: hello@a11yproject.com 

 

33. B               A     D                     ( BAD )  W3C 

o    Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates o Summary: Improving a Web site using Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.

                        The B               A     D                    ( BAD )               -page resource that shows an

inaccessible website and a retrofitted version of this same website. Each web page includes inline annotations that can be activated to highlight some of the key accessibility barriers or repairs. Each web page is also accompanied by an evaluation report to inform the developers on the level of conformance to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG).

o    Source: W3C & Education and Outreach Working Group (EOWG)  Shadi Abou-Zahra o         Date: Feb 2012

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/demos/bad/  o            More info: shadi@w3.org

 

34. WebAIM Resources  Utah State University o             Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Multiple and extensive resources. Includes intro materials, Section 508/WCAG checklists, and simulations (low vision, dyslexia, distractibility). Includes the WAVE automatic web accessibility evaluation tool. 

o    Source: WebAIM (Accessibility In Mind)/Utah State University o        Date: N/A

o    URL: https://webaim.org/resources/ 

o    More info: cyndi.rowland@usu.edu

 

Platform – Android & Google (3 resources)

 

35.  Android accessibility overview  Google  o     Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: Extensive documentation on how to build accessible apps on Android, include the TalkBack screen reader.  o     Source: Android/Google o         Date: Updated regularly

o    URL: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/accessibility/  o    More info: https://developer.android.com/about

 

36.  TalkBack Tutorial for Android  Google o        Type: Website

Audience: People with disabilities 

Summary: How to use the TalkBack screen reader on Android devices. TalkBack is the Google screen reader included on Android devices. TalkBack gives you spoken feedback so that you can use your device without looking at the screen.

o    Source: Google o    Date: Updated regularly

o    URL: https://support.google.com/accessibility/android/answer/6283677?hl=en  o More info: https://www.google.com/accessibility/blog/post/android-accessibility-suite-62/

 

37.  A11ycasts videos  Google o             Type: Videos

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: 30+ videos from Google developers on building accessible experiences on all Google's platforms. 5-20 mins each. The goal of A11ycasts is to teach developers how accessibility works all the way down at the platform level, while also demonstrating real world accessibility problems and solutions to fix them. o       Source: YouTube user: Google Chrome Developers o     Date: Aug 2016  Jan 2018 o       URL:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ag3DMNbL_ig&list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHl

YJyqw7g  o             More info: https://developers.google.com/web/resources/contributors/robdodson

 

Platform – iOS & Apple (3 resources)

 

38.  Accessibility on iOS  Apple o            Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Extensive documentation on how to build accessible apps on iOS, including the VoiceOver screen reader.  o     Source: Apple o            Date: Updated regularly.  o        URL: https://developer.apple.com/accessibility/ios/  o         More info: https://www.apple.com/accessibility/

 

39.  VoiceOver Tutorial for iOS  Apple o Type: Website

o    Audience: People with disabilities o Summary: How to use VoiceOver screen reader on iOS devices.  o       Source: Apple o            Date: Updated regularly. o         URL: https://www.apple.com/accessibility/iphone/vision/  o More info: https://www.apple.com/accessibility/mac/vision/

 

40. T         E         T    B     F     C       

o    Type: Video o          Audience: All

o    Summary: Blind YouTuber Tommy Edison shows how he uses Twitter on his iPhone. 3 minute video. Tommy Edison, who has been blind since birth, demonstrates how people who are visually impaired use the iPhone 4S. He shows us how the Accessibility setting on the phone allows him to use the Twitter and You Tube applications.

o    Source: YouTube user: The Tommy Edison Experience  http://tommyedison.com  Date: Apr 2012

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c0nvdiRdehw  o      More info: general@blindfilmcritic.com

 

Platform – Windows & Microsoft (4 resources)

 

41.  Narrator Tutorial for Windows 10  Microsoft o            Type: Website

o    Audience: People with disabilities o Summary: How to use the Narrator screen reader on Windows 10 devices.  o Source: Microsoft o       Date: May 2019 

o    URL: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/22798/windows-10-complete-guide-to-narrator  o More info: https://www.microsoft.com/Accessibility/disability-answer-desk

 

42.  Developing Inclusive Windows 10 apps  Microsoft o Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: How to build accessible apps on Windows 10. Specifically, this article discusses how to develop accessible Universal Windows Platform (UWP) apps. It assumes that you understand how to design the logical hierarchy for your app. Learn to develop accessible Windows 10 UWP apps that include keyboard navigation, color and contrast settings, and support for assistive technologies.

o    Source: Microsoft  Karl Bridge, Michael Satran, and Mike Jacobs o    Date: Feb 2017

o    URL: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/accessibility/developinginclusive-windows-apps 

o    More info: https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/accessible-apps

 

43.  Accessibility at a Glance  Microsoft Video Series o    Type: Videos

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: 25+ short videos (1-2 mins each) covering topics like making accessible Universal Windows Applications, presenting inclusively, etc. Accessibility at a Glance is a series of short videos built to help you learn how to create an inclusive digital experience for people with disabilities.

o    Source: YouTube user: MSFTEnable o Date: Feb 2018  May 2019

o    URL: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLtSVUgxIo6KqBBGqNdPQG64f-hTs1YxFM  o    More info: https://www.youtube.com/user/MSFTEnable/videos

 

44.  Microsoft Accessibility Homepage o Type: Website

o    Audience: People with disabilities, teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Homepage for all accessibility topics at Microsoft, linking to multiple and diverse resources. 

o    Source: Microsoft o             Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/accessibility  o           More info: https://twitter.com/MSFTEnable

 

Platform – Other (2 resources)

 

45.  Adobe Accessibility Guides o       Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: Multiple resources on accessibility in Adobe products, including authoring accessible PDF files. General resources at the same site include case studies, tutorials, best practices, and whitepapers.  o       Source: Adobe o           Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.adobe.com/accessibility/products.html  o    More info: https://www.adobe.com/accessibility.html

 

46.  Xbox Accessibility o             Type: Website

o    Audience: People with disabilities

o    Summary: How to use assistive technologies on Xbox, including the special Xbox Adaptive Controller. 

o    Source: Microsoft o             Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.xbox.com/en-US/xbox-one/accessibility  o More info: https://support.xbox.com/en-US/home 

 

Standards, Rules & Regulations (3 resources)

 

47.  WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines)  W3C o         Type: Standard/Guidelines

o    Audience: Web content developers (page authors, site designers, etc.), Web authoring tool developers, Web accessibility evaluation tool developers, Others who want or need a standard for web accessibility, including for mobile accessibility

o    Summary: Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) is developed through the W3C process in cooperation with individuals and organizations around the world, with a goal of providing a single shared standard for web content accessibility that meets the needs of individuals, organizations, and governments internationally. The WCAG documents explain how to make web content more accessible to people with disabilities. Web "content" generally refers to the information in a web page or web application, including natural information such as text, images, and sounds; and code or markup that defines structure, presentation, etc.

Included are WCAG 2.0 (2008) and WCAG 2.1 (2018) which are both active.

o    Source: World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) o Date: Jun 2018

o    URL: https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/  o More info: https://www.w3.org/

 

48.  GSA Section 508  US Government o            Type: Standard/Guidelines

o    Audience: Federal agency staff who play a role in IT accessibility

o    Summary: The U.S. Access Board published a final rule updating accessibility requirements for information and communication technology (ICT) covered by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act and Section 255 of the Communications Act. The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) Office of Government-wide Policy (OGP) is tasked under this law to provide technical assistance to help Federal agencies comply with these requirements, and ensure that covered ICT is accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities. Topics covered include Program Management, Procurement, Tools & Training, Policy & Compliance.

o    Source: US Government o Date: Jan 2017 o          URL: https://section508.gov/ 

o    More info: CIO508Help@gsa.gov

 

49.  EN 301 549 Accessibility requirements for ICT products and services  CEN/CENELEC/ETSI o       Type: Standard/Guidelines

o    Audience: Anyone interested in more accessible products

o    Summary: This is the European equivalent of US Section 508, except that it is a standard that can be applied more broadly than just a procurement, and it does not contain the scoping and enabling language that is found in Section 508 frontmatter. Rather, its scope and application are defined by other laws. EN 301 549 is currently in revision. The link above is to the last released version for comment. It is highly harmonized with Section 508 but there are some differences that it is expected will be cleared up when Section 508 becomes unfrozen in future years.

o    Source: CEN/CENELEC/ESTI

o    Date: June 2019 o   URL:

https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/301500_301599/301549/03.01.01_20/en_301549v03010

1a.pdf  o     More info: ETSI Search & Browse Standards

 

Design & Universal Design (7 resources)

 

50.  Promoting the Integration of Universal Design into University Curriculum (UDUC)  CU Boulder  o Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers and advocates

o    Summary: Links to a list of websites, videos, syllabi, course components, and web resources. for integrating universal design topics into your curriculum. 

o    Source: University of Colorado at Boulder

o    Date: N/A

o    URL: http://www.uduc.org/resources.php  o   More info: hkramer@colorado.edu 

 

51.  Universal Design of Web Pages in Class Projects  UW o       Type: Project Ideas o        Audience: College (senior)

o    Summary: This publication is designed to give guidance to instructors of precollege and postsecondary web design courses as well as to those who, as an activity in their classes, have students create web pages. It describes options for integrating accessibility content within any course. References are made to ready-to-use publications online in PDF and alternate formats for duplication as handouts for your class. These materials can be used to develop the knowledge and skills of both instructors and students.

o    Source: University of Washington

o    Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.washington.edu/doit/universal-design-web-pages-class-projects  o More info: doit@uw.edu 

 

52.  Inclusive Design 24  Conference Videos o    Type: Video o       Audience: Planners to Practitioners. 

o    Summary: Inclusive Design 24 (#id24) is a free 24-hour online event for the global community. It celebrates inclusive design and shares knowledge and ideas from analogue to digital, from design to development, from planners to practitioners, and everything and everyone in between. o      Source: https://inclusivedesign24.org/2019/ 

o    Date: Oct 2018

o    URL: https://www.youtube.com/inclusivedesign24  o More info: hello@inclusivedesign24.org 

 

53.  Accessible UX Design Studio  TPG o           Type: Presentation o       Audience: UX design students

o    Summary: Workshop style slide deck (116 slides) about accessible design in the form of a

                                                 .  

o    Source: TPG  The Paciello Group  Sarah Horton, David Sloan o        Date: May 2016

o    URL: https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B0YCWfzZeWMuQzdxOV9ubUNFem8  o    More info: shorton@paciellogroup.com 

 

54.  Dos and don'ts on designing for accessibility  UK Government o       Type: Posters  o            Audience: Designers

o    Summary: T                                                                                                                      ,            design practices for making services accessible in government. Currently, there are six different posters in the series that cater to users from these areas: low vision, D/deaf and hard of hearing, dyslexia, motor disabilities, users on the autistic spectrum and users of screen readers.

o    Source: UK Government o Date: Sep 2016

o    URL: https://accessibility.blog.gov.uk/2016/09/02/dos-and-donts-on-designing-foraccessibility/ 

o    More info: https://hodigital.blog.gov.uk/author/karwai-pun/ 

 

55.  Government Digital Service  UK Government o Type: Github Repository, Pattern Library o Audience: Designers, Developers, Practitioners

o    Summary: The Government Digital Service (GDS) is a unit of the UK's Cabinet Office tasked with transforming government services. There is an accessibility focus/awareness. They have a practice of Coding In The Open, which means that a lot of public repositories end up on their GitHub. As well as the alphagov organization, they use GDS operations to store their open source infrastructure tooling. It includes many different resources, including the Service

Manual  helping government teams create and run great digital services that meet the Digital Service Standard; Government Design Principles  the UK government's design principles and examples of how they've been used; and the Service Toolkit  all you need to design, build and run services that meet government standards.

o    Source: UK Government o Date: Feb 2019

o    URL: https://alphagov.github.io/ 

o    More info: Via Github links per item

 

56.  Inclusive Design Toolkit  Microsoft o Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Activities and videos demonstrating the value of designing for one and extending to many. Defines Inclusive Design as a methodology, born out of digital environments, that enables and draws on the full range of human diversity. This means including and learning from people with a range of perspectives.

o    Source: Microsoft o             Date: N/A

o    URL: https://www.microsoft.com/design/inclusive/  o More info: InclusiveDesignTeam@microsoft.com

 

General Materials (5 resources)

 

57.  AccessComputing Resources  UW o Type: Website (documentation and resources) o Audience: Teachers of students with disabilities

o    Summary: Instructors can use the following curricula to fully include students with disabilities in computing courses and share accessible design strategies with students. Includes links to Teach Access materials, SIGCSE presentation, MILK (Mobile Inclusive Learning Kit),

Quorum programming language, WebD2, Universal Design of Web Pages in Class Projects.  o Source: University of Washington o       Date: Current

o    URL: https://www.washington.edu/accesscomputing/resources/teach-access  o          More info: accesscomp@uw.edu 

 

58.  MasterList of Accessibility Strategies  Raising the Floor o       Type: Website

o    Audience: Anyone looking to learn with a broad international perspective

o    Summary: A collaborative comprehensive listing of all the identified strategies internationally for making ICT more accessible. Each strategy is accompanied by a page discussing how the strategy can be applied to different disabilities, a listing of free, open source, free to try, and other software that implements the strategy, open source components related to the strategy and a listing of research papers the cover the strategy. There is also a reward for any strategy not covered by the list, and for additional research references for any strategy. Additional helpful links from this source:

                                ▪     Towards Accessibility for Cognitive, Language and Learning Disabilities

                                ▪     Web Accessibility Standards

▪           European Accessibility Legislation and Regulations o Source: Raising the Floor o       Date: Continually Updated

o    URL: https://ds.gpii.net/learn/accessibility-masterlist  o          More info: http://ds.gpii.net 

 

59.  The DeveloperSpace  Raising the Floor o     Type: Website

o    Audience: Anyone designing accessible ICT or interested in it

o    Summary: A single-point-of-reference website to find resources, components and people to conceive, develop, test and market novel accessible solutions for ICT access. The Site provides resources to Learn, Develop, and Market accessible ICT. There is a page for presenting challenges and grand challenges to students, faculty and teams. There is a list of over 700 open source projects including code. This is a collaborative international resource that credits individual contributions. All contributors or curators welcome.

o    Source: Raising the Floor o Date: Continually Updated  o     URL: https://ds.gpii.net/  o         More info: http://ds.gpii.net 

 

60.  The Unified Listing  Raising the Floor o         Type: Website

o    Audience: Anyone interested in a comprehensive list of ICT access products o          Summary: A federated database of ICT access products and mainstream products with ICT access features.  The Unified Listing federates ICT products for databases across the world, providing a single location to search for products  with links back to each of the databases.  Several types of search are provided to match individual needs and search skills including a

standard search, a guided search (for those learning about assistive technologies), an

                                                      ,                                                        .

o    Source: Raising the Floor o Date: Continually Updated  o     URL: https://ul.gpii.net/  o          More info: http://ul.gpii.net/ 

 

61.  Accessibility Learning Labs (ALL)  RIT o       Type: Website

o    Audience: Students at all levels

o    Summary: The Accessibility Learning Labs (ALL) are designed to be easily adoptable labs that both inform and motivate students about foundational topics in creating software that is accessible to everyone. Its goals are to provide activities that incorporate accessibility education and improve understanding of accessible design. At the time of writing, the labs include: deaf and hard of hearing, color blindness, screen readers, and dexterity. 

o    Source: AWARE Lab at RIT o          Date: Continually Updated  o     URL: http://all.rit.edu/  o             More info: aware@mail.rit.edu 

 

Other Materials (5 resources)

 

62.  G Suite User Guide to Accessibility  o           Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers and practitioners

o    Summary: How to create accessible content with Google's G Suite apps. This page is primarily for G Suite end users. If you're an administrator, refer to the administrator guide to accessibility.

o    Source: Google o    Date: Updated regularly

o    URL: https://support.google.com/a/answer/1631886?hl=en  o            More info: https://www.google.com/accessibility/

 

63.  Google AI o             Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Artificial Intelligence capabilities from Google. Direct links to accessibility are nonobvious.

o    Source: Google o    Date: N/A o       URL: https://ai.google/ 

o    More info: https://twitter.com/GoogleAI

 

64.  Microsoft Office Accessibility Center o          Type: Website

o    Audience: People with disabilities, teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: How to use Microsoft Office (including Office 2016 Office for business Office 365 for home Office 2016 for Mac) with assistive technologies. 

o    Source: Microsoft o             Date: Updated regularly

o    URL: https://support.office.com/en-us/article/office-accessibility-center-resources-for-peoplewith-disabilities-ecab0fcf-d143-4fe8-a2ff-6cd596bddc6d?redirectSourcePath=%2fenus%2farticle%2fAccessibility-in-Office-365-5AF0FCBC-0F3D-46CE-9A9F-

7BE8CFEE3C37"&"&ui=en-US&rs=en-US&ad=US 

o    More info: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/accessibility/office 

 

65.  Authoring Accessible Content with Microsoft Office 365 o          Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Multiple tutorials and training, including 18 videos linked separately, for using

O    365                                          ,                        A         C                                            -in.  o Source: Microsoft o      Date: Updated regularly

o    URL: https://support.office.com/en-us/article/make-your-content-accessible-to-everyone-

38059c2d-45ef-4830-9797-618f0e96f3ab?ui=en-US&rs=en-US&ad=US  o     More info: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/accessibility/office 

 

66.  Microsoft Cognitive Services o         Type: Website

o    Audience: Teachers, practitioners, and advocates

o    Summary: Artificial Intelligence capabilities from Microsoft. Direct links to accessibility are non-obvious. o       Source: Microsoft

                o    Date: N/A 

o          URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-services/    o   More info: https://twitter.com/Azure

 

 

 

<end of document> 
