Universal Design for Learning (UDL) Guidelines 
Version 2.2 
January 25, 2018 
This is an archived version of UDL Guidelines Version 2.2 which appeared on the UDL Guidelines website from January 2018 to July 2024. The UDL Guidelines are meant to be dynamic and continuously developed based on research and feedback from practitioners. In 2020, we embarked on a journey to expand UDL Guidelines 2.2 to address barriers rooted in biases and systems of exclusion. That next iteration, Version 3.0, was launched on July 30, 2024. 
Suggested Citation: CAST (2018). Universal Design for Learning Guidelines version 2.2. Retrieved from http://udlguidelines.cast.org 

Table of Contents 
Table of Contents	2 
What are the UDL Guidelines?	4 
About the Graphic Organizer	4 
Organization	4 
Applying to Practice	5 
Provide multiple means of Engagement	5 
Provide options for Recruiting Interest	5 
Optimize individual choice and autonomy	6 
Optimize relevance, value, and authenticity	6 
Minimize threats and distractions	7 
Provide options for Sustaining Effort & Persistence	7 
Heighten salience of goals and objectives	8 
Vary demands and resources to optimize challenge	8 
Foster collaboration and community	9 
Increase mastery-oriented feedback	9 
Provide options for Self Regulation	10 
Promote expectations and beliefs that optimize motivation	10 
Facilitate personal coping skills and strategies	10 
Develop self-assessment and reflection	11 
Provide multiple means of Representation	11 
Provide options for Perception	11 
Offer ways of customizing the display of information	12 
Offer alternatives for auditory information	12 
Offer alternatives for visual information	13 
Provide options for Language & Symbols	13 
Clarify vocabulary and symbols	14 
Clarify syntax and structure	14 
Support decoding of text, mathematical notation, and symbols	14 
Promote understanding across languages	15 
Illustrate through multiple media	15 
Provide options for Comprehension	16 
Activate or supply background knowledge	16 
Highlight patterns, critical features, big ideas, and relationships	16 
Guide information processing and visualization	17 
Maximize transfer and generalization	17 
Provide multiple means of Action & Expression	18 
Provide options for Physical Action	18 
Vary the methods for response and navigation	19 
Optimize access to tools and assistive technologies	19 
Provide options for Expression & Communication	19 
Use multiple media for communication	20 
Use multiple tools for construction and composition	20 
Build fluencies with graduated levels of support for practice and performance	21 
Provide options for Executive Functions	21 
Guide appropriate goal-setting	21 
Support planning and strategy development	22 
Facilitate managing information and resources	22 
Enhance capacity for monitoring progress	22 
Research Evidence	23 
Foundational Research on UDL	23 
Research on the Principles of UDL	24 
Promising Practices Research	24 
Implementation Research	24 
Research Evidence by Checkpoint	24 
Engagement Research	24 
Representation Research	68 
Action & Expression Research	113 

 	 
What are the UDL Guidelines? 
The UDL Guidelines are a tool used in the implementation of Universal Design for Learning, a framework to improve and optimize teaching and learning for all people based on scientific insights into how humans learn. Learn more about the Universal Design for Learning framework from CAST. The UDL Guidelines can be used by educators, curriculum developers, researchers, parents, and anyone else who wants to implement the UDL framework in a learning environment. These guidelines offer a set of concrete suggestions that can be applied to any discipline or domain to ensure that all learners can access and participate in meaningful, challenging learning opportunities. 
About the Graphic Organizer 
The UDL Guidelines are a tool that can be used to design learning experiences that meet the needs of all learners. These Guidelines offer a set of concrete suggestions for applying the UDL framework to practice and help ensure that all learners can access and participate in meaningful, challenging learning opportunities. 
Organization 
The UDL Guidelines are organized both horizontally and vertically. Vertically, the Guidelines are organized according to the three principles of UDL: engagement, representation, and action and expression. The principles are broken down into Guidelines, and each of these Guidelines have corresponding "checkpoints" that provide more detailed suggestions. 
 
The Guidelines are also organized horizontally. The "access" row includes the guidelines that suggest ways to increase access to the learning goal by recruiting interest and by offering options for perception and physical action. 
 
The "build" row includes the guidelines that suggest ways to develop effort and persistence, language and symbols, and expression and communication. 
 
Finally, the "internalize" row includes the guidelines that suggest ways to empower learners through self-regulation, comprehension, and executive function. 
 
Taken together, the Guidelines lead to the ultimate goal of UDL: to develop "expert learners" who are, each in their own way, resourceful and knowledgeable, strategic and goal-directed, purposeful and motivated. 
 
Applying to Practice 
The UDL Guidelines are not meant to be a "prescription" but a set of suggestions that can be applied to reduce barriers and maximize learning opportunities for all learners. They can be mixed and matched according to specific learning goals and can be applied to particular content areas and contexts. 
In many cases, educators find that they are already incorporating some aspects of these guidelines into their practice; however, barriers to the learning goal may still be present. We see the Guidelines as a tool to support the development of a shared language in the design of goals, assessments, methods, and materials that lead to accessible, meaningful, and challenging learning experiences for all. 
Provide multiple means of Engagement 
Affect represents a crucial element to learning, and learners differ markedly in the ways in which they can be engaged or motivated to learn. There are a variety of sources that can influence individual variation in affect including neurology, culture, personal relevance, subjectivity, and background knowledge, along with a variety of other factors. Some learners are highly engaged by spontaneity and novelty while others are disengaged, even frightened, by those aspects, preferring strict routine. Some learners might like to work alone, while others prefer to work with their peers. In reality, there is not one means of engagement that will be optimal for all learners in all contexts; providing multiple options for engagement is essential. 
Provide options for Recruiting Interest 
Spark excitement and curiosity for learning 
Information that is not attended to, that does not engage learners' cognition, is in fact inaccessible. It is inaccessible both in the moment and in the future, because relevant information goes unnoticed and unprocessed. As a result, teachers devote considerable effort to recruiting learner attention and engagement. But learners differ significantly in what attracts their attention and engages their interest. Even the same learner will differ over time and circumstance; their "interests" change as they develop and gain new knowledge and skills, as their biological environments change, and as they develop into self-determined adolescents and adults. It is, therefore, important to have alternative ways to recruit learner interest, ways that reflect the important inter- and intra-individual differences amongst learners. 
Optimize individual choice and autonomy  
Empower learners to take charge of their own learning. 
In an instructional setting, it is often inappropriate to provide choice of the learning objective itself, but it is often appropriate to offer choices in how that objective can be reached, in the context for achieving the objective, in the tools or supports available, and so forth. Offering learners choices can develop self-determination, pride in accomplishment, and increase the degree to which they feel connected to their learning. However, it is important to note that individuals differ in how much and what kind of choices they prefer to have. It is therefore not enough to simply provide choice. The right kind of choice and level of independence must be optimized to ensure engagement. 
● Provide learners with as much discretion and autonomy as possible by providing choices in such things as: 
○ The level of perceived challenge 
○ The type of rewards or recognition available 
○ The context or content used for practicing and assessing skills ○ The tools used for information gathering or production ○ The color, design, or graphics of layouts, etc. 
○ The sequence or timing for completion of subcomponents of tasks 
● Allow learners to participate in the design of classroom activities and academic tasks 
● Involve learners, where and whenever possible, in setting their own personal academic and behavioral goals 
Optimize relevance, value, and authenticity 
Connect learning to experiences that are meaningful and valuable. 
Individuals are engaged by information and activities that are relevant and valuable to their interests and goals. This does not necessarily mean that the situation has to be equivalent to real life, as fiction can be just as engaging to learners as non-fiction, but it does have to be relevant and authentic to learners' individual goals and the instructional goals. Individuals are rarely interested in information and activities that have no relevance or value. In an educational setting, one of the most important ways that teachers recruit interest is to highlight the utility and relevance of learning and to demonstrate that relevance through authentic, meaningful activities. It is a mistake, of course, to assume that all learners will find the same activities or information equally relevant or valuable to their goals. To recruit all learners equally, it is critical to provide options that optimize what is relevant, valuable, and meaningful to the learner. 
● Vary activities and sources of information so that they can be: 
○ Personalized and contextualized to learners' lives 
○ Culturally relevant and responsive 
○ Socially relevant 
○ Age and ability appropriate 
○ Appropriate for different racial, cultural, ethnic, and gender groups 
● Design activities so that learning outcomes are authentic, communicate to real audiences, and reflect a purpose that is clear to the participants 
● Provide tasks that allow for active participation, exploration and experimentation 
● Invite personal response, evaluation and self-reflection to content and activities 
● Include activities that foster the use of imagination to solve novel and relevant problems, or make sense of complex ideas in creative ways 
Minimize threats and distractions 
Foster a safe space to learn and take risks. 
One of the most important things a teacher can do is to create a safe space for learners. To do this, teachers need to reduce potential threats and distractions in the learning environment. When learners have to focus their attention on having basic needs met or avoiding a negative experience they cannot concentrate on the learning process. While the physical safety of a learning environment is of course necessary, subtler types of threats and distractions must be attended to as well; what is threatening or potentially distracting depends on learners' individual needs and background. An English Language Learner might find language experimentation threatening, while some learners might find too much sensory stimulation distracting. The optimal instructional environment offers options that reduce threats and negative distractions for everyone to create a safe space in which learning can occur. 
● Create an accepting and supportive classroom climate 
● Vary the level of novelty or risk 
○ Charts, calendars, schedules, visible timers, cues, etc. that can increase the predictability of daily activities and transitions 
○ Creation of class routines 
○ Alerts and previews that can help learners anticipate and prepare for changes in activities, schedules, and novel events 
○ Options that can, in contrast to the above, maximize the unexpected, surprising, or novel in highly routinized activities 
● Vary the level of sensory stimulation 
○ Variation in the presence of background noise or visual stimulation, noise buffers, number of features or items presented at a time 
○ Variation in pace of work, length of work sessions, availability of breaks or timeouts, or timing or sequence of activities 
● Vary the social demands required for learning or performance, the perceived level of support and protection and the requirements for public display and evaluation 
● Involve all participants in whole class discussions 
Provide options for Sustaining Effort & Persistence 
Tackle challenges with focus and determination. 
Many kinds of learning, particularly the learning of skills and strategies, require sustained attention and effort. When motivated to do so, many learners can regulate their attention and affect in order to sustain the effort and concentration that such learning will require. However, learners differ considerably in their ability to self-regulate in this way. Their differences reflect disparities in their initial motivation, their capacity and skills for self-regulation, their susceptibility to contextual interference, and so forth. A key instructional goal is to build the individual skills in self-regulation and self-determination that will equalize such learning opportunities (see Self Regulation). In the meantime, the external environment must provide options that can equalize accessibility by supporting learners who differ in initial motivation, selfregulation skills, etc. 
Heighten salience of goals and objectives 
Set a vision for the goal and why it matters. 
Over the course of any sustained project or systematic practice, there are many sources of interest and engagement that compete for attention and effort. For some learners, they need support to remember the initial goal or to maintain a consistent vision of the rewards of reaching that goal. For those learners, it is important to build in periodic or persistent "reminders" of both the goal and its value in order for them to sustain effort and concentration in the face of distracters. 
● Prompt or require learners to explicitly formulate or restate goal 
● Display the goal in multiple ways 
● Encourage division of long-term goals into short-term objectives 
● Demonstrate the use of hand-held or computer-based scheduling tools 
● Use prompts or scaffolds for visualizing desired outcome 
● Engage learners in assessment discussions of what constitutes excellence and generate relevant examples that connect to their cultural background and interests 
Vary demands and resources to optimize challenge 
Rise to high expectations using flexible tools and supports. 
Learners vary not only in their skills and abilities, but also in the kinds of challenges that motivate them to do their best work. All learners need to be challenged, but not always in the same way. In addition to providing appropriately varied levels and types of demands, learners also need to be provided with the right kinds of resources necessary for successful completion of the task. Learners cannot meet a demand without appropriate, and flexible, resources. Providing a range of demands, and a range of possible resources, allows all learners to find challenges that are optimally motivating. Balancing the resources available to meet the challenge is vital. 
● Differentiate the degree of difficulty or complexity within which core activities can be completed 
● Provide alternatives in the permissible tools and scaffolds 
● Vary the degrees of freedom for acceptable performance 
● Emphasize process, effort, improvement in meeting standards as alternatives to external evaluation and competition 
Foster collaboration and community 
Cultivate a community of learners 
In the 21st century, all learners must be able to communicate and collaborate effectively within a community of learners. This is easier for some than others but remains a goal for all learners. The distribution of mentoring through peers can greatly increase the opportunities for one-on-one support. When carefully structured, such peer cooperation can significantly increase the available support for sustained engagement. Flexible rather than fixed grouping allows better differentiation and multiple roles, as well as providing opportunities to learn how to work most effectively with others. Options should be provided in how learners build and utilize these important skills. 
● Create cooperative learning groups with clear goals, roles, and responsibilities 
● Create school-wide programs of positive behavior support with differentiated objectives and supports 
● Provide prompts that guide learners in when and how to ask peers and/or teachers for help 
● Encourage and support opportunities for peer interactions and supports (e.g., peer-tutors) 
● Construct communities of learners engaged in common interests or activities 
● Create expectations for group work (e.g., rubrics, norms, etc.) 
Increase mastery-oriented feedback 
Guide learning by emphasizing the role of effort and process. 
Assessment is most productive for sustaining engagement when the feedback is relevant, constructive, accessible, consequential, and timely. But the type of feedback is also critical in helping learners to sustain the motivation and effort essential to learning. Mastery-oriented feedback is the type of feedback that guides learners toward mastery rather than a fixed notion of performance or compliance. It also emphasizes the role of effort and practice rather than "intelligence" or inherent "ability" as an important factor in guiding learners toward successful long-term habits and learning practices. These distinctions may be particularly important for learners whose disabilities have been interpreted, by either themselves or their caregivers, as permanently constraining and fixed. 
● Provide feedback that encourages perseverance, focuses on development of efficacy and self-awareness, and encourages the use of specific supports and strategies in the face of challenge 
● Provide feedback that emphasizes effort, improvement, and achieving a standard rather than on relative performance 
● Provide feedback that is frequent, timely, and specific 
● Provide feedback that is substantive and informative rather than comparative or competitive 
● Provide feedback that models how to incorporate evaluation, including identifying patterns of errors and wrong answers, into positive strategies for future success 
Provide options for Self Regulation 
Harness the power of emotions and motivation in learning. 
While it is important to design the extrinsic environment so that it can support motivation and engagement (see Recruiting Interest and Sustaining Effort & Persistence), it is also important to develop learners' intrinsic abilities to regulate their own emotions and motivations. The ability to self-regulate-to strategically modulate one's emotional reactions or states in order to be more effective at coping and engaging with the environment-is a critical aspect of human development. While many individuals develop self-regulatory skills on their own, either by trial and error or by observing successful adults, many others have significant difficulties in developing these skills. Unfortunately, some classrooms do not address these skills explicitly, leaving them as part of the "implicit" curriculum that is often inaccessible or invisible to many. Those teachers and settings that address self-regulation explicitly will be most successful in applying the UDL principles through modeling and prompting in a variety of methods. As in other kinds of learning, individual differences are more likely than uniformity. A successful approach requires providing sufficient alternatives to support learners with very different aptitudes and prior experience to effectively manage their own engagement and affect. 
Promote expectations and beliefs that optimize motivation 
Set personal goals that inspire confidence and ownership of learning. 
One important aspect of self-regulation is the personal knowledge each learner has about what he or she finds motivating, be it intrinsic or extrinsic. To accomplish this, learners need to be able to set personal goals that can be realistically reached, as well as fostering positive beliefs that their goals can be met. However, learners also need to be able to deal with frustration and avoid anxiety when they are in the process of meeting their goals. Multiple options need to be given to learners to help them stay motivated. 
● Provide prompts, reminders, guides, rubrics, checklists that focus on: 
○ Self-regulatory goals like reducing the frequency of aggressive outbursts in response to frustration 
○ Increasing the length of on-task orientation in the face of distractions 
○ Elevating the frequency of self-reflection and self-reinforcements 
● Provide coaches, mentors, or agents that model the process of setting personally appropriate goals that take into account both strengths and weaknesses 
● Support activities that encourage self-reflection and identification of personal goals 
Facilitate personal coping skills and strategies 
Develop and manage healthy emotional responses and interactions. 
Providing a model of self-regulatory skills is not sufficient for most learners. They will need sustained apprenticeships that include scaffolding. Reminders, models, checklists, and so forth can assist learners in choosing and trying an adaptive strategy for managing and directing their emotional responses to external events (e.g., strategies for coping with anxiety-producing social settings or for reducing task-irrelevant distracters) or internal events (e.g., strategies for decreasing rumination on depressive or anxiety-producing ideation). Such scaffolds should provide sufficient alternatives to meet the challenge of individual differences in the kinds of strategies that might be successful and the independence with which they can be applied. Provide differentiated models, scaffolds and feedback for: 
● Managing frustration 
● Seeking external emotional support 
● Developing internal controls and coping skills 
● Appropriately handling subject specific phobias and judgments of "natural" aptitude (e.g., 
"how can I improve on the areas I am struggling in?" rather than "I am not good at math") 
● Use real life situations or simulations to demonstrate coping skills 
Develop self-assessment and reflection 
Increase awareness around progress toward goals and how to learn from mistakes. 
In order to develop better capacity for self-regulation, learners need to learn to monitor their emotions and reactivity carefully and accurately. Individuals differ considerably in their capability and propensity for metacognition, and some learners will need a great deal of explicit instruction and modeling in order to learn how to do this successfully. For many learners, merely recognizing that they are making progress toward greater independence is highly motivating. Alternatively, one of the key factors in learners losing motivation is their inability to recognize their own progress. It is important, moreover, that learners have multiple models and scaffolds of different self-assessment techniques so that they can identify, and choose, ones that are optimal. 
● Offer devices, aids, or charts to assist individuals in learning to collect, chart and display data from their own behavior for the purpose of monitoring changes in those behaviors 
● Use activities that include a means by which learners get feedback and have access to alternative scaffolds (e.g., charts, templates, feedback displays) that support understanding progress in a manner that is understandable and timely 
Provide multiple means of Representation 
Learners differ in the ways that they perceive and comprehend information that is presented to them. For example, those with sensory disabilities (e.g., blindness or deafness); learning disabilities (e.g., dyslexia); language or cultural differences, and so forth may all require different ways of approaching content. Others may simply grasp information quicker or more efficiently through visual or auditory means rather than printed text. Also learning, and transfer of learning, occurs when multiple representations are used, because they allow students to make connections within, as well as between, concepts. In short, there is not one means of representation that will be optimal for all learners; providing options for representation is essential. 
Provide options for Perception 
Interact with flexible content that doesn't depend on a single sense like sight, hearing, movement, or touch. 
Learning is impossible if information is imperceptible to the learner, and difficult when information is presented in formats that require extraordinary effort or assistance. To reduce barriers to learning, it is important to ensure that key information is equally perceptible to all learners by: 1) providing the same information through different modalities (e.g., through vision, hearing, or touch); 2) providing information in a format that will allow for adjustability by the user (e.g., text that can be enlarged, sounds that can be amplified). Such multiple representations not only ensure that information is accessible to learners with particular sensory and perceptual disabilities, but also easier to access and comprehend for many others. 
Offer ways of customizing the display of information 
Use flexible materials with settings that can be adjusted based on needs and preferences. 
In print materials, the display of information is fixed and permanent. In properly prepared digital materials, the display of the same information is very malleable and customizable. For example, a call-out box of background information may be displayed in a different location, or enlarged, or emphasized by the use of color, or deleted entirely. Such malleability provides options for increasing the perceptual clarity and salience of information for a wide range of learners and adjustments for preferences of others. While these customizations are difficult with print materials, they are commonly available automatically in digital materials, though it cannot be assumed that because it is digital it is accessible as many digital materials are equally inaccessible. Educators and learners should work together to attain the best match of features to learning needs. 
● Display information in a flexible format so that the following perceptual features can be varied: 
○ The size of text, images, graphs, tables, or other visual content 
○ The contrast between background and text or image 
○ The color used for information or emphasis 
○ The volume or rate of speech or sound 
○ The speed or timing of video, animation, sound, simulations, etc. 
○ The layout of visual or other elements 
○ The font used for print materials 
Offer alternatives for auditory information 
Share information in more ways than sound and voice alone. 
Sound is a particularly effective way to convey the impact of information, which is why sound design is so important in movies and why the human voice is particularly effective for conveying emotion and significance. However, information conveyed solely through sound is not equally accessible to all learners and is especially inaccessible for learners with hearing disabilities, for learners who need more time to process information, or for learners who have memory difficulties. In addition, listening itself is a complex strategic skill that must be learned. To ensure that all learners have access to learning, options should be available for any information, including emphasis, presented aurally. 
● Use text equivalents in the form of captions or automated speech-to-text (voice recognition) for spoken language 
● Provide visual diagrams, charts, notations of music or sound 
● Provide written transcripts for videos or auditory clips 
● Provide American Sign Language (ASL) for spoken English 
● Use visual analogues to represent emphasis and prosody (e.g., emoticons, symbols, or images) 
● Provide visual or tactile (e.g., vibrations) equivalents for sound effects or alerts 
● Provide visual and/or emotional description for musical interpretation 
Offer alternatives for visual information 
Share information in more ways than images and text alone. 
Images, graphics, animations, video, or text are often the optimal way to present information, especially when the information is about the relationships between objects, actions, numbers, or events. But such visual representations are not equally accessible to all learners, especially learners with visual disabilities or those who are not familiar with the type of graphic being used. Visual information can be quite dense, particularly with visual art, which can have multiple complex meanings and interpretations depending on contextual factors and the viewer's knowledge base. To ensure that all learners have equal access to information, it is essential to provide non-visual alternatives. 
● Provide descriptions (text or spoken) for all images, graphics, video, or animations 
● Use touch equivalents (tactile graphics or objects of reference) for key visuals that represent concepts 
● Provide physical objects and spatial models to convey perspective or interaction 
● Provide auditory cues for key concepts and transitions in visual information 
Text is a special case of visual information. The transformation from text into audio is among the most easily accomplished methods for increasing accessibility. The advantage of text over audio is its permanence, but providing text that is easily transformable into audio accomplishes that permanence without sacrificing the advantages of audio. Digital synthetic text-to-speech is increasingly effective but still disappoints in its ability to carry the valuable information in prosody. 
● Follow accessibility standards (NIMAS, DAISY, etc.) when creating digital text 
● Allow for a competent aide, partner, or "intervener" to read text aloud 
● Provide access to text-to-speech software 
Provide options for Language & Symbols 
Communicate through languages that create a shared understanding. 
Learners vary in their facility with different forms of representation-both linguistic and nonlinguistic. Vocabulary that may sharpen and clarify concepts for one learner may be opaque and foreign to another. An equal sign (=) might help some learners understand that the two sides of the equation need to be balanced, but might cause confusion to a student who does not understand what it means. A graph that illustrates the relationship between two variables may be informative to one learner and inaccessible or puzzling to another. A picture or image that carries meaning for some learners may carry very different meanings for learners from differing cultural or familial backgrounds. As a result, inequalities arise when information is presented to all learners through a single form of representation. An important instructional strategy is to ensure that alternative representations are provided not only for accessibility, but for clarity and comprehensibility across all learners. 
Clarify vocabulary and symbols 
Construct meaning from words, symbols, and numbers using different representations. 
The semantic elements through which information is presented-the words, symbols, numbers, and icons-are differentially accessible to learners with varying backgrounds, languages, and lexical knowledge. To ensure accessibility for all, key vocabulary, labels, icons, and symbols should be linked to, or associated with, alternate representations of their meaning (e.g., an embedded glossary or definition, a graphic equivalent, a chart or map). Idioms, archaic expressions, culturally exclusive phrases, and slang should be translated. 
● Pre-teach vocabulary and symbols, especially in ways that promote connection to the learners' experience and prior knowledge 
● Provide graphic symbols with alternative text descriptions 
● Highlight how complex terms, expressions, or equations are composed of simpler words or symbols 
● Embed support for vocabulary and symbols within the text (e.g., hyperlinks or footnotes to definitions, explanations, illustrations, previous coverage, translations) 
● Embed support for unfamiliar references within the text (e.g., domain specific notation, lesser-known properties and theorems, idioms, academic language, figurative language, mathematical language, jargon, archaic language, colloquialism, and dialect) 
Clarify syntax and structure 
Make the patterns and properties of systems like grammar, musical notation, taxonomies, and equations explicit. 
Single elements of meaning (like words or numbers) can be combined to make new meanings. Those new meanings, however, depend upon understanding the rules or structures (like syntax in a sentence or the properties of equations) of how those elements are combined. When the syntax of a sentence or the structure of a graphical representation is not obvious or familiar to learners, comprehension suffers. To ensure that all learners have equal access to information, provide alternative representations that clarify, or make more explicit, the syntactic or structural relationships between elements of meaning. 
● Clarify unfamiliar syntax (in language or in math formulas) or underlying structure (in diagrams, graphs, illustrations, extended expositions or narratives) through alternatives that: 
○ Highlight structural relations or make them more explicit 
○ Make connections to previously learned structures 
○ Make relationships between elements explicit (e.g., highlighting the transition words in an essay, links between ideas in a concept map, etc.) 
Support decoding of text, mathematical notation, and symbols 
Make sure text and symbols don't get in the way of the learning goal. 
The ability to fluently decode words, numbers or symbols that have been presented in an encoded format (e.g., visual symbols for text, haptic symbols for Braille, algebraic expressions for relationships) takes practice for any learner, but some learners will reach automaticity more quickly than others. Learners need consistent and meaningful exposure to symbols so that they can comprehend and use them effectively. Lack of fluency or automaticity greatly increases the cognitive load of decoding, thereby reducing the capacity for information processing and comprehension. To ensure that all learners have equal access to knowledge, at least when the ability to decode is not the focus of instruction, it is important to provide options that reduce the barriers that decoding raises for learners who are unfamiliar or dysfluent with the symbols. 
● Allow the use of Text-to-Speech 
● Use automatic voicing with digital mathematical notation (Math ML) 
● Use digital text with an accompanying human voice recording (e.g., Daisy Talking Books) 
● Allow for flexibility and easy access to multiple representations of notation where appropriate (e.g., formulas, word problems, graphs) 
● Offer clarification of notation through lists of key terms 
Promote understanding across languages 
Use translations, descriptions, movement, and images to support learning in unfamiliar or complex languages. 
The language of curricular materials is usually monolingual, but often the learners in the classroom are not, so the promotion of cross-linguistic understanding is especially important. For new learners of the dominant language (e.g., English in American schools) or for learners of academic language (the dominant discourse in school), the accessibility of information is greatly reduced when no linguistic alternatives are available. Providing alternatives, especially for key information or vocabulary is an important aspect of accessibility. 
● Make all key information in the dominant language (e.g., English) also available in first languages (e.g., Spanish) for learners with limited-English proficiency and in ASL for learners who are deaf 
● Link key vocabulary words to definitions and pronunciations in both dominant and heritage languages 
● Define domain-specific vocabulary (e.g., "map key" in social studies) using both domainspecific and common terms 
● Provide electronic translation tools or links to multilingual glossaries on the web 
● Embed visual, non-linguistic supports for vocabulary clarification (pictures, videos, etc.) 
Illustrate through multiple media 
Make learning come alive with simulations, graphics, activities, and videos. 
Classroom materials are often dominated by information in text. But text is a weak format for presenting many concepts and for explaining most processes. Furthermore, text is a particularly weak form of presentation for learners who have text- or language-related disabilities. Providing alternatives-especially illustrations, simulations, images or interactive graphics-can make the information in text more comprehensible for any learner and accessible for some who would find it completely inaccessible in text. 
● Present key concepts in one form of symbolic representation (e.g., an expository text or a math equation) with an alternative form (e.g., an illustration, dance/movement, diagram, table, model, video, comic strip, storyboard, photograph, animation, physical or virtual manipulative) 
● Make explicit links between information provided in texts and any accompanying representation of that information in illustrations, equations, charts, or diagrams 
Provide options for Comprehension 
Construct meaning and generate new understandings. 
The purpose of education is not to make information accessible, but rather to teach learners how to transform accessible information into usable knowledge. Decades of cognitive science research have demonstrated that the capability to transform accessible information into usable knowledge is not a passive process but an active one. Constructing usable knowledge, knowledge that is accessible for future decision-making, depends not upon merely perceiving information, but upon active "information processing skills" like selective attending, integrating new information with prior knowledge, strategic categorization, and active memorization. Individuals differ greatly in their skills in information processing and in their access to prior knowledge through which they can assimilate new information. Proper design and presentation of information-the responsibility of any curriculum or instructional methodology-can provide the scaffolds necessary to ensure that all learners have access to knowledge. 
Activate or supply background knowledge 
Build connections to prior understandings and experiences. 
Information is more accessible and likely to be assimilated by learners when it is presented in a way that primes, activates, or provides any pre-requisite knowledge. Barriers and inequities exist when some learners lack the background knowledge that is critical to assimilating or using new information. However, there are also barriers for learners who have the necessary background knowledge but might not know it is relevant. Those barriers can be reduced when options are available that supply or activate relevant prior knowledge, or link to the prerequisite information elsewhere. 
● Anchor instruction by linking to and activating relevant prior knowledge (e.g., using visual imagery, concept anchoring, or concept mastery routines) 
● Use advanced organizers (e.g., KWL methods, concept maps) 
● Pre-teach critical prerequisite concepts through demonstration or models 
● Bridge concepts with relevant analogies and metaphors 
● Make explicit cross-curricular connections (e.g., teaching literacy strategies in the social studies classroom) 
Highlight patterns, critical features, big ideas, and relationships 
Accentuate important information and how it relates to the learning goal. 
One of the big differences between experts and novices in any domain is the facility with which they distinguish what is critical from what is unimportant or irrelevant. Since experts quickly recognize the most important features in information, they allocate their time efficiently, quickly identifying what is valuable and finding the right "hooks" with which to assimilate the most valuable information into existing knowledge. As a consequence, one of the most effective ways to make information more accessible is to provide explicit cues or prompts that assist individuals in attending to those features that matter most while avoiding those that matter least. 
● Highlight or emphasize key elements in text, graphics, diagrams, formulas 
● Use outlines, graphic organizers, unit organizer routines, concept organizer routines, and concept mastery routines to emphasize key ideas and relationships 
● Use multiple examples and non-examples to emphasize critical features 
● Use cues and prompts to draw attention to critical features 
● Highlight previously learned skills that can be used to solve unfamiliar problems 
Guide information processing and visualization 
Support the process of meaning-making through models, scaffolds, and feedback. 
Successful transformation of information into usable knowledge often requires the application of mental strategies and skills for "processing" information. These cognitive, or meta-cognitive, strategies involve the selection and manipulation of information so that it can be better summarized, categorized, prioritized, contextualized and remembered. While some learners in any classroom may have a full repertoire of these strategies, along with the knowledge of when to apply them, most learners do not. Well-designed materials can provide customized and embedded models, scaffolds, and feedback to assist learners who have very diverse abilities in using those strategies effectively. 
● Give explicit prompts for each step in a sequential process 
● Provide options for organizational methods and approaches (tables and algorithms for processing mathematical operations) 
● Provide interactive models that guide exploration and new understandings 
● Introduce graduated scaffolds that support information processing strategies 
● Provide multiple entry points to a lesson and optional pathways through content (e.g., exploring big ideas through dramatic works, arts and literature, film and media) 
● "Chunk" information into smaller elements 
● Progressively release information (e.g., sequential highlighting) 
● Remove unnecessary distractions unless they are essential to the instructional goal 
Maximize transfer and generalization 
Apply learning to new contexts. 
All learners need to be able to generalize and transfer their learning to new contexts. Students vary in the amount of scaffolding they need for memory and transfer in order to improve their ability to access their prior learning. Of course, all learners can benefit from assistance in how to transfer the information they have to other situations, as learning is not about individual facts in isolation, and students need multiple representations for this to occur. Without this support and the use of multiple representations, information might be learned, but is inaccessible in new situations. Supports for memory, generalization, and transfer include techniques that are designed to heighten the memorability of the information, as well as those that prompt and guide learners to employ explicit strategies. 
● Provide checklists, organizers, sticky notes, electronic reminders 
● Prompt the use of mnemonic strategies and devices (e.g., visual imagery, paraphrasing strategies, method of loci, etc.) 
● Incorporate explicit opportunities for review and practice 
● Provide templates, graphic organizers, concept maps to support note-taking 
● Provide scaffolds that connect new information to prior knowledge (e.g., word webs, halffull concept maps) 
● Embed new ideas in familiar ideas and contexts (e.g., use of analogy, metaphor, drama, music, film, etc.) 
● Provide explicit, supported opportunities to generalize learning to new situations (e.g., different types of problems that can be solved with linear equations, using physics principles to build a playground) 
● Offer opportunities over time to revisit key ideas and linkages between ideas 
Provide multiple means of Action & Expression 
Learners differ in the ways that they can navigate a learning environment and express what they know. For example, individuals with significant movement impairments (e.g., cerebral palsy), those who struggle with strategic and organizational abilities (executive function disorders), those who have language barriers, and so forth approach learning tasks very differently. Some may be able to express themselves well in written text but not speech, and vice versa. It should also be recognized that action and expression require a great deal of strategy, practice, and organization, and this is another area in which learners can differ. In reality, there is not one means of action and expression that will be optimal for all learners; providing options for action and expression is essential. 
Provide options for Physical Action 
Interact with accessible materials and tools. 
A textbook or workbook in a print format provides limited means of navigation or physical interaction (e.g., turning pages, handwriting in spaces provided). Many interactive pieces of educational software similarly provide only limited means of navigation or interaction (e.g., using a joystick or keyboard). Navigation and interaction in those limited ways will raise barriers for some learners-those with physical disabilities, blindness, dysgraphia, or who need various kinds of executive functioning supports. It is important to provide materials with which all learners can interact. Properly designed curricular materials provide a seamless interface with common assistive technologies through which individuals with movement impairments can navigate and express what they know-to allow navigation or interaction with a single switch, through voice activated switches, expanded keyboards and others. 
Vary the methods for response and navigation 
Interact with tools and environments that make learning physically accessible to all. 
Learners differ widely in their capacity to navigate their physical environment. To reduce barriers to learning that would be introduced by the motor demands of a task, provide alternative means for response, selection, and composition. In addition, learners differ widely in their optimal means for navigating through information and activities. To provide equal opportunity for interaction with learning experiences, an instructor must ensure that there are multiple means for navigation and control is accessible. 
● Provide alternatives in the requirements for rate, timing, speed, and range of motor action required to interact with instructional materials, physical manipulatives, and technologies 
● Provide alternatives for physically responding or indicating selections (e.g., alternatives to marking with pen and pencil, alternatives to mouse control) 
● Provide alternatives for physically interacting with materials by hand, voice, single switch, joystick, keyboard, or adapted keyboard 
Optimize access to tools and assistive technologies 
Open doors to learning with accessible tools and devices. 
Providing a learner with a tool is often not enough. We need to provide the support to use the tool effectively. Many learners need help navigating through their environment (both in terms of physical space and the curriculum), and all learners should be given the opportunity to use tools that might help them meet the goal of full participation in the classroom. However, significant numbers of learners with disabilities have to use Assistive Technologies for navigation, interaction, and composition on a regular basis. It is critical that instructional technologies and curricula do not impose inadvertent barriers to the use of these assistive technologies. An important design consideration, for example, is to ensure that there are keyboard commands for any mouse action so that learners can use common assistive technologies that depend upon those commands. It is also important, however, to ensure that making a lesson physically accessible does not inadvertently remove its challenge to learning. 
● Provide alternate keyboard commands for mouse action 
● Build switch and scanning options for increased independent access and keyboard alternatives 
● Provide access to alternative keyboards 
● Customize overlays for touch screens and keyboards 
● Select software that works seamlessly with keyboard alternatives and alt keys 
Provide options for Expression & Communication 
Compose and share ideas using tools that help attain learning goals. 
There is no medium of expression that is equally suited for all learners or for all kinds of communication. On the contrary, there are media, which seem poorly suited for some kinds of expression, and for some kinds of learning. While a learner with dyslexia may excel at story-telling in conversation, he may falter when telling that same story in writing. It is important to provide alternative modalities for expression, both to level the playing field among learners and to allow the learner to appropriately (or easily) express knowledge, ideas and concepts in the learning environment. 
Use multiple media for communication 
Express learning in flexible ways. 
Unless specific media and materials are critical to the goal (e.g., learning to paint specifically with oils, learning to hand write with calligraphy) it is important to provide alternative media for expression. Such alternatives reduce media-specific barriers to expression among learners with a variety of special needs, but also increase the opportunities for all learners to develop a wider range of expression in a media-rich world. For example, it is important for all learners to learn composition, not just writing, and to learn the optimal medium for any particular content of expression and audience. 
● Compose in multiple media such as text, speech, drawing, illustration, comics, storyboards, design, film, music, dance/movement, visual art, sculpture, or video 
● Use physical manipulatives (e.g., blocks, 3D models, base-ten blocks) 
● Use social media and interactive web tools (e.g., discussion forums, chats, web design, annotation tools, storyboards, comic strips, animation presentations) 
● Solve problems using a variety of strategies 
Use multiple tools for construction and composition 
Share thoughts and ideas using tools that complement the learning goal. 
There is a tendency in schooling to focus on traditional tools rather than contemporary ones. This tendency has several liabilities: 1) it does not prepare learners for their future; 2) it limits the range of content and teaching methods that can be implemented; 3) it restricts learners ability to express knowledge about content (assessment); and, most importantly, 4) it constricts the kinds of learners who can be successful. Current media tools provide a more flexible and accessible toolkit with which learners can more successfully take part in their learning and articulate what they know. Unless a lesson is focused on learning to use a specific tool (e.g., learning to draw with a compass), curricula should allow many alternatives. Like any craftsman, learners should learn to use tools that are an optimal match between their abilities and the demands of the task. 
● Provide spell checkers, grammar checkers, word prediction software 
● Provide text-to-speech software (voice recognition), human dictation, recording 
● Provide calculators, graphing calculators, geometric sketch pads, or pre-formatted graph paper 
● Provide sentence starters or sentence strips 
● Use story webs, outlining tools, or concept mapping tools 
● Provide Computer-Aided-Design (CAD), music notation (writing) software, or mathematical notation software 
● Provide virtual or concrete mathematics manipulatives (e.g., base-10 blocks, algebra blocks) 
● Use web applications (e.g., wikis, animation, presentation) 
Build fluencies with graduated levels of support for practice and performance 
Apply and gradually release scaffolds to support independent learning. 
Learners must develop a variety of fluencies (e.g., visual, audio, mathematical, reading, etc.). This means that they often need multiple scaffolds to assist them as they practice and develop independence. Curricula should offer alternatives in the degrees of freedom available, with highly scaffolded and supported opportunities provided for some and wide degrees of freedom for others who are ready for independence. Fluency is also built through many opportunities for performance, be it in the form of an essay or a dramatic production. Performance helps learners because it allows them to synthesize their learning in personally relevant ways. Overall, it is important to provide options that build learners' fluencies. 
● Provide differentiated models to emulate (i.e. models that demonstrate the same outcomes but use differing approaches, strategies, skills, etc.) 
● Provide differentiated mentors (i.e., teachers/tutors who use different approaches to motivate, guide, feedback or inform) 
● Provide scaffolds that can be gradually released with increasing independence and skills 
(e.g., embedded into digital reading and writing software) 
● Provide differentiated feedback (e.g., feedback that is accessible because it can be customized to individual learners) 
● Provide multiple examples of novel solutions to authentic problems 
Provide options for Executive Functions 
Develop and act on plans to make the most out of learning. 
At the highest level of the human capacity to act skillfully are the so-called "executive functions." Associated with networks that include the prefrontal cortex, these capabilities allow humans to overcome impulsive, short-term reactions to their environment and instead to set long-term goals, plan effective strategies for reaching those goals, monitor their progress, and modify strategies as needed. In short, they allow learners to take advantage of their environment. Of critical importance to educators is the fact that executive functions have very limited capacity due to working memory. This is true because executive capacity is sharply reduced when: 1) executive functioning capacity must be devoted to managing "lower level" skills and responses which are not automatic or fluent thus the capacity for "higher level" functions is taken; and 2) executive capacity itself is reduced due to some sort of higher level disability or to lack of fluency with executive strategies. The UDL framework typically involves efforts to expand executive capacity in two ways: 1) by scaffolding lower-level skills so that they require less executive processing; and 2) by scaffolding higher level executive skills and strategies so that they are more effective and developed. Previous guidelines have addressed lower-level scaffolding, this guideline addresses ways to provide scaffolding for executive functions themselves. 
Guide appropriate goal-setting 
Practice setting challenging and authentic goals. 
It cannot be assumed that learners will set appropriate goals to guide their work, but the answer should not be to provide goals for students. Such a short-term remedy does little to develop new skills or strategies in any learner. It is therefore important that learners develop the skill of effective goal setting. The UDL framework embeds graduated scaffolds for learning to set personal goals that are both challenging and realistic. 
● Provide prompts and scaffolds to estimate effort, resources, and difficulty 
● Provide models or examples of the process and product of goal-setting 
● Provide guides and checklists for scaffolding goal-setting 
● Post goals, objectives, and schedules in an obvious place 
Support planning and strategy development 
Formulate reasonable plans for reaching goals. 
Once a goal is set, effective learners and problem-solvers plan a strategy, including the tools they will use, for reaching that goal. For young children in any domain, older learners in a new domain, or any learner with one of the disabilities that compromise executive functions (e.g., intellectual disabilities), the strategic planning step is often omitted, and trial and error attempts take its place. To help learners become more plan-full and strategic a variety of options are needed, such as cognitive "speed bumps" that prompt them to "stop and think," graduated scaffolds that help them actually implement strategies; or engagement in decision-making with competent mentors. 
● Embed prompts to "stop and think" before acting as well as adequate space 
● Embed prompts to "show and explain your work" (e.g., portfolio review, art critiques) 
● Provide checklists and project planning templates for understanding the problem, setting up prioritization, sequences, and schedules of steps 
● Embed coaches or mentors that model think-alouds of the process 
● Provide guides for breaking long-term goals into reachable short-term objectives 
Facilitate managing information and resources 
Support organization and memory using flexible tools and processes. 
One of the limits of executive function is that imposed by the limitations of so-called working memory. This "scratch pad" for maintaining chunks of information where they can be accessed as part of comprehension and problem-solving is very limited for any learner and even more severely limited for many learners with learning and cognitive disabilities. As a result, many such learners seem disorganized, forgetful, and unprepared. Wherever working memory capacity is not construct-relevant in a lesson, it is important to provide a variety of internal scaffolds and external organizational aids-exactly those kinds that executives use-to keep information organized and "in mind." 
● Provide graphic organizers and templates for data collection and organizing information 
● Embed prompts for categorizing and systematizing 
● Provide checklists and guides for note-taking 
Enhance capacity for monitoring progress 
Analyze growth over time and how to build from it. 
Learning cannot happen without feedback, and that means learners need a clear picture of the progress that they are (or are not) making. When assessments and feedback do not inform instruction or when they are not given to the students in a timely manner, learning cannot change because students do not know what to do differently. This lack of knowledge about what to improve can make some learners seem "perseverative," careless, or unmotivated. For these learners all of the time, and for most learners some of the time, it is important to ensure that options can be customized to provide feedback that is more explicit, timely, informative, and accessible. Especially important is providing "formative" feedback that allows learners to monitor their own progress effectively and to use that information to guide their own effort and practice. 
● Ask questions to guide self-monitoring and reflection 
● Show representations of progress (e.g., before and after photos, graphs and charts showing progress over time, process portfolios) 
● Prompt learners to identify the type of feedback or advice that they are seeking 
● Use templates that guide self-reflection on quality and completeness 
● Provide differentiated models of self-assessment strategies (e.g., role-playing, video reviews, peer feedback) 
● Use of assessment checklists, scoring rubrics, and multiple examples of annotated student work/performance examples 
Research Evidence 
UDL is based upon the most widely replicated finding in educational research: learners are highly variable in their response to instruction. In virtually every report of research on instruction or intervention, individual differences are not only evident in the results; they are prominent. However, these individual differences are usually treated as sources of annoying error variance as distractions from the more important "main effects." UDL, on the other hand, treats these individual differences as an equally important focus of attention. In fact, when viewed through the UDL framework these findings are fundamental to understanding and designing effective instruction. The research that supports UDL falls into four categories: foundational research of UDL, research on the UDL principles, research on promising practices, and research on implementation of UDL. 
Foundational Research on UDL 
UDL draws from a variety of research including the fields of neuroscience, the learning sciences, and cognitive psychology. It is deeply rooted in concepts such as the Zone of Proximal Development, scaffolding, mentors, and modeling, as well as the foundational works of Piaget; Vygotsky; Bruner, Ross, and Wood; and Bloom, who espoused similar principles for understanding individual differences and the pedagogies required for addressing them. For example, Vygotsky emphasized one of the key points of UDL curricula-the importance of graduated "scaffolds". These are important to the novice, but that can be gradually removed as the individual acquires expertise. Scaffolding with graduated release is a practice that is as old as human culture and is relevant to learning in almost any domain, from learning to walk or ride a bike "unaided" to the long apprenticeships of neurosurgery or aircraft flying. 
Research on the Principles of UDL 
The research basis for the general principles of UDL is also grounded in modern neuroscience. The three basic principles are built upon the knowledge that our learning brains are composed of three different networks, recognition, strategic, and affective. The Guidelines align these three networks with the three principles (recognition to representation, strategic to action and expression, and affective to engagement). This empirical base in neuroscience provides a solid foundation for understanding how the learning brain intersects with effective instruction. This alignment is further extended and clarified by the guidelines and checkpoints. 
Promising Practices Research 
Promising lines of research include work identifying the specific practices that are critical to meeting the challenge of individual differences-research that has been amassed over decades and by many different researchers. These studies are labeled as "promising" because they appear to fit within the UDL framework, but they have not been tested in a UDL environment or using the framework. It is important that these practices are studied within a UDL environment for them to be considered effective UDL practices. This is an area in which we greatly encourage contributions from the field. 
Implementation Research 
Fourth, there is research on specific applications of UDL within learning environments, including conditions necessary for implementation, common barriers, and lessons from the field. This new area of research is in its early stages but will take a more prominent place as full-scale curricular applications and system-wide implementations are developed. It should be noted that this is another area in which we greatly encourage contributions from the research field. 
Research Evidence by Checkpoint 
Explore the research used to develop each UDL Guidelines Checkpoint. 
Engagement Research 
7.1: Optimize individual choice and autonomy 
The majority of the experimental studies are focused on the benefits of providing students with choices in the learning environment. Options in materials, tools, content, format, etc. all have been shown to increase student motivation and engagement. Other studies focus more specifically upon the importance of providing students with greater autonomy and control in order to develop a sense of ownership for their own learning. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on the advantages of embedding student choice and autonomy into curricula. 
7.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Amabile, T. M., & Gitomer, J. (1984). Children's artistic creativity: Effects of choice in task materials. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10(2), 209-215. 
Assor, A., Kaplan, H., & Roth, G. (2002). Choice is good, but relevance is excellent: Autonomyenhancing and suppressing teacher behaviours predicting students" engagement in schoolwork. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(2), 261-278. 
Bennett, D. E., Zentall, S. S., French, B. F., & Giorgetti-Borucki, K. (2006). The effects of computeradministered choice on students with and without characteristics of attentionDeficit/Hyperactivity disorder. Behavioral Disorders, 31(2), 189-203. 
Boggiano, A. K., Main, D. S., & Katz, P. A. (1988). Children's preference for challenge: The role of perceived competence and control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 134-141. 
Catlin, K. S., Lewan, G. J., & Perignon, B. J. (1999). Increasing student engagement through goalsetting, cooperative learning & student choice. (Master's Action Research Project, Saint Xavier University and IRI/SkyLight). 
Cavazos-Kottke, S. (2006). Five readers browsing: The reading interests of talented middle school boys. Gifted Child Quarterly, 50(2), 132-147. 
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization, personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(4), 715-730. 
Cosden, M., Gannon, C., & Haring, T. G. (1995). Teacher-control versus student-control over choice of task and reinforcement for students with severe behavior problems. Journal of Behavioral Education, 5(1), 11-27. 
Earley, P. C. (1985). Influence of information choice and task complexity upon goal acceptance, performance and personal goals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(3), 481-491. 
Flowerday, T., & Schraw, G. (2000). Teacher beliefs about instructional choice: A phenomenological study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(4), 634-645. 
Flowerday, T., Schraw, G., & Stevens, J. (2004). The role of choice and interest in reader engagement. The Journal of Experimental Education, 72(2), 93-114. 
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). Autonomy in children's learning: An experimental and individual difference investigation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(5), 890-898. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Alao, S. (1997). Designing contexts to increase motivations for reading. Educational Psychologist, 32(2), 95-105. 
Hannafin, R. D., & Sullivan, H. J. (1996). Preferences and learner control over amount of instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(1), 162-173. 
Iyengar, S., & Lepper, M. (1999). Rethinking the value of choice: A cultural perspective on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 995-1006. 
Kern, L., Bambara, L., & Fogt, J. (2002). Class-wide curricular modification to improve the behavior of students with emotional or behavioral disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 27(4), 317-326. 
Laurillard, D. (1987). Computers and the emancipation of students: Giving control to the learner. Instructional Science, 16(1), 3-18. 
Mayer, R. E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive constraints on multimedia learning: When presenting more material results in less understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1), 187-198. 
Passig, D., & Levin, H. (1999). Gender interest differences with multimedia learning interfaces. Computers in Human Behavior, 15(2), 173-183. 
Passig, D., & Levin, H. (2000). Gender preferences for multimedia interfaces. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 16(1), 64-71. 
Patall, E. A., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. C. (2008). The effects of choice on intrinsic motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research findings. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 270-300. 
Reeve, J., Jang, H., Carrell, D., Jeon, S., & Barch, J. (2004). Enhancing students' engagement by increasing teachers' autonomy support. Motivation and Emotion, 28(2), 147-169. 
Riding, R. J., & Watts, M. (1997). The effect of cognitive style on the preferred format of instructional material. Educational Psychology, 17(1), 179-183. 
Schraw, G., Flowerday, T., & Reisetter, M. F. (1998). The role of choice in reader engagement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(4), 705-714. 
Shogren, K. A., Faggella-Luby, M. N., Bae, S.J., & Wehmeyer, M.L. (2004). The effect of choicemaking as an intervention for problem behavior: A meta-analysis. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 6(4), 228-237. 
Skinner, E. A., & Belmont, M. J. (1993). Motivation in the classroom: Reciprocal effects of teacher behavior and student engagement across the school year. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85(4), 571-581. 
Skinner, E. A., Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., & Connell, J. P. (1998). Individual differences and the development of perceived control. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(2-3), i-vi, 1-220. 
Stipek, D. J. (1996). Motivation and instruction. In D. C. Berliner, & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology. (pp. 85-113). New York: Simon & Schuster/Macmillan. 
Stipek, D. J., & Weisz, J. R. (1981). Perceived personal control and academic achievement. Review of Educational Research, 51(1), 101-137. 
Sweet, A. P., Guthrie, J. T., & Ng, M. M. (1998). Teacher perceptions and student reading motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 210-223. 
Tafarodi, R. W., Mehranvar, S., Panton, R. L., & Milne, A. B. (2002). Putting oneself in the task: 
Choice, personalization, and confidence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(5), 648-658. 
Tafarodi, R. W., Milne, A. B., & Smith, A. J. (1999). The confidence of choice: Evidence for an augmentation effect on self-perceived performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(11), 1405-1416. 
Turner, J. C. (1995). The influence of classroom contexts on young children's motivation for literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 30(3), 410-441. 
Unrau, N., & Schlackman, J. (2006). Motivation and its relationship with reading achievement in an urban middle school. Journal of Educational Research, 100(2), 81-101. 
Wang, M. C., & Stiles, B. (1976). An investigation of children's concept of self-responsibility for their school learning. American Educational Research Journal, 13(3), 159-179. 
Zuckerman, M., Porac, J., Lathin, D., & Deci, E. L. (1978). On the importance of self-determination for intrinsically-motivated behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4(3), 443-446. 
7.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117-148. 
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York, NY: W.H. Freeman. 
Beane, J. A. (1990). Affect in the curriculum: Toward democracy, dignity, and diversity. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Bergin, D. A. (1999). Influences on classroom interest. Educational Psychologist, 34(2), 87-98. 
D'Amico, J. J. (1980). Reviving student participation. Educational Leadership, 38(1), 44-46. 
Deci, E. L. (1991). The relation of interest to the motivation of behavior: A self-determination theory perspective. In A. Renninger, S. Hidi & A. Krapp (Eds.), The role of interest in learning and development (pp. 43-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). The support of autonomy and the control of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(6), 1024-1037. 
Deci, E. L., Vallerand, R. J., Pelletier, L. G., & Ryan, R. M. (1991). Motivation and education: The selfdetermination perspective. Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4), 325-346. 
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New York: The Macmillan Company. 
Edwards, C. (1998). Partner, nurturer, and guide: The role of the teacher. In C. Edwards, L. Gandini & G. Forman (Eds.), The hundred languages of children. the reggio emilia approach - advanced reflections (2nd ed., pp. 179-198). London: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Davis, M. H. (2003). Motivating struggling readers in middle school through an engagement model of classroom practice. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(1), 59. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Cox, K. E. (2001). Classroom conditions for motivation and engagement in reading. Educational Psychology Review, 13(3), 283-302. 
Guthrie, J. T., & McCann, A. D. (1997). Characteristics of classrooms that promote motivations and strategies for learning. In J. T. Guthrie, & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Reading engagement: Motivating readers through integrated instruction (pp. 128-148). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Wigfield, A. (2000). Engagement and motivation in reading. In M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook for reading research (pp. 403-422). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Kamii, C. (1991). Toward autonomy: The importance of critical thinking and choice making. School Psychology Review, 20(3), 382-388. 
Kohn, A. (1993). Choices for children: Why and how to let students decide. Phi Delta Kappan, 75(1), 8-21. 
Lee, I. (1998). Supporting greater autonomy in language learning. ELT Journal, 52(4), 282-290. 
Marzano, R. J., Pickering, D. J., & Pollock, J. E. (2001). Classroom instruction that works: Researchedbased strategies for increasing student achievement. Virginia: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Power, B. M., Wilhelm, J. D., & Chandler, K. (1997). Reading Stephen King: Issues of censorship, student choice, and popular literature. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
Pressley, M., Yokoi, L., Rankin, J., Wharton-McDonald, R., & Mistretta, J. (1997). A survey of the instructional practices of grade 5 teachers nominated as effective in promoting literacy. Scientific Studies of Reading, 1(2), 145-160. 
Reeve, J. (2006). Teachers as facilitators: What autonomy-supportive teachers do and why their students benefit. The Elementary School Journal, 106(3), 225-236. 
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68-78. 
Shevin, M., & Klein, N. K. (2004). The importance of choice-making skills for students with severe disabilities. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 29(3), 161-168. 
Stefanou, C. R., Perencevich, K. C., DiCintio, M., & Turner, J. C. (2004). Supporting autonomy in the classroom: Ways teachers encourage student decision making and ownership. Educational Psychologist, 39(2), 97-110. 
Stipek, D. J., & Weisz, J. R. (1981). Perceived personal control and academic achievement. Review of Educational Research, 51(1), 101. 
Suarez, D. (2007). When students choose the challenge. Educational Leadership, 65(3), 60-65. 
Williams, S. (1998). An organizational model of choice: A theoretical analysis differentiating choice, personal control, and self-determination. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 124(4), 465-491. 
7.2: Optimize relevance, value, and authenticity 
The experimental and quantitative evidence gathered here primarily focuses upon the use of "anchored instruction" and other techniques to enhance relevance in order to increase student engagement and achievement. These studies illustrate the power of connecting new content to relevant, "real-life" contexts. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroombased perspective on anchored instruction as well as provide opinions regarding the importance of embedding the modern technology that students use in their day-to-day lives into the classroom. 
7.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Assor, A., Kaplan, H., & Roth, G. (2002). Choice is good, but relevance is excellent: Autonomyenhancing and suppressing teacher behaviours predicting students' engagement in schoolwork. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(2), 261-278. 
Baker, L., & Wigfield, A. (1999). Dimensions of children's motivation for reading and their relations to reading activity and reading achievement. Reading Research Quarterly, 34(4), 452-477. 
Bottge, B. A., & Hasselbring, T. S. (1993). A comparison of two approaches for teaching complex, authentic mathematics problems to adolescents in remedial math classes. Exceptional Children, 59(6), 556-566. 
Bottge, B. A., & Heinrichs, M. (2002). Weighing the benefits of anchored math instruction for students with disabilities in general education classes. The Journal of Special Education, 35(4), 186200. 
Bottge, B. A., Rueda, E., Serlin, R. C., & Hung, Y. H. (2007). Shrinking achievement differences with anchored math problems: Challenges and possibilities. The Journal of Special Education, 41(1), 31-
49. 
Condry, J. (1977). Enemies of exploration: Self-initiated versus other-initiated learning. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(7), 159-177. 
Etheris, A. I. (2004). Computer-supported collaborative problem solving and anchored instruction in a mathematics classroom: An exploratory study. International Journal of Learning Technology, 1(1), 16-39. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Finelli, R., Courey, S. J., Hamlett, C. L., Sones, E. M., et al. (2006). Teaching third graders about real-life mathematical problem solving: A randomized controlled study. The Elementary School Journal, 106(4), 293-311. 
Gersten, R. (1998). Recent advances in instructional research for students with learning disabilities: An overview. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(3), 162-170. 
Guthrie, J. T., McGough, K., Bennett, L., & Rice, M. E. (1996). Concept-oriented reading instruction: 
An integrated curriculum to develop motivations and strategies for reading. In L. Baker, P. 
Afflerbach & D. Reinking (Eds.), Developing engaged readers in school and home communities (pp. 165-190). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Langone, J., Malone, D. M., & Clinton, G. N. (1999). The effects of technology-enhanced anchored instruction on the knowledge of preservice special educators. Teacher Education and Special Education, 22(2), 85-96. 
Leonard, J., Davis, J. E., & Sidler, J. L. (2005). Cultural relevance and computer-assisted instruction. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 37(3), 263-285. 
Lepper, M. R., & Cordova, D. I. (1992). A desire to be taught: Instructional consequences of intrinsic motivation. Motivation and Emotion, 16(3), 187-208. 
Mayer, R. E., Sobko, K., & Mautone, P. D. (2003). Social cues in multimedia learning: Role of speaker's voice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 419-425. 
Mechling, L. (2005). The effect of instructor-created video programs to teach students with disabilities: A literature review. TAM Board Members, 20(2), 25-36. 
Nagy, W. E. (1985). Learning words from context. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(2), 233-253. 
Okolo, C. M. (1992). The effect of computer-assisted instruction format and initial attitude on the arithmetic facts proficiency and continuing motivation of students with learning disabilities. Exceptionality, 3(4), 195-211. 
Parker, L. E., & Lepper, M. R. (1992). Effects of fantasy contexts on children's learning and motivation: Making learning more fun. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62(4), 625-633. 
Rieth, H. J., Bryant, D. P., Kinzer, C. K., Colburn, L. K., Hur, S. J., & Hartman, P. (2003). An analysis of the impact of anchored instruction on teaching and learning activities in two ninth-grade language arts classes. Remedial and Special Education, 24(3), 173-184. 
Schuh, K. L., & Farrell, C. A. (2006). Student effort, media preference, and writing quality when using print and electronic resources in expository writing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35(1), 61-81. 
Shyu, H. Y. (1997). Anchored instruction for Chinese students: Enhancing attitudes toward mathematics. International Journal of Instructional Media, 24(1), 55-62. 
Shyu, H. Y. (1999). Effects of media attributes in anchored instruction. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 21(2), 119-139. 
Shyu, H. Y. C. (2000). Using video-based anchored instruction to enhance learning: Taiwan's experience. British Journal of Educational Technology, 31(1), 57-69. 
Stipek, D. J. (1996). Motivation and instruction. In D. C. Berliner, & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 85-113). New York: Simon & Schuster/Macmillan. 
Sweet, A. P., Guthrie, J. T., & Ng, M. M. (1998). Teacher perceptions and student reading motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 210-223. 
Unrau, N., & Schlackman, J. (2006). Motivation and its relationship with reading achievement in an urban middle school. Journal of Educational Research, 100(2), 81-101. 
Vye, N. J. (1990). The effects of anchored instruction for teaching social studies: Enhancing comprehension of setting information. Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA. 
7.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Astleitner, H., & Wiesner, C. (2004). An integrated model of multimedia learning and motivation. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 13(1), 3-21. 
Baart, N. (2002). Saying it "more intensely": Using sensory experience to teach poetry writing. English Journal, 91(3), 98-103. 
Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., & Tuzun, H. (2005). Making learning fun: Quest 
Atlantis, a game without guns. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 86-107. 
Bergin, D. A. (1999). Influences on classroom interest. Educational Psychologist, 34(2), 87-98. 
Blachowicz, C. L., & Fisher, P. J. (2007). Best practices in vocabulary instruction. In L.B. Gambrell, L.M. Morrow, & M. Pressley (Eds.), Best Practices in Literacy Instruction (pp. 178-203). New York: Guilford Publications, Inc.. 
Bransford, J. D., Sherwood, R. D., Hasselbring, T. S., Kinzer, C. K., & Williams, S. M. (1990). 
Anchored instruction: Why we need it and how technology can help. In D. Nix & R. Sprio (Eds.), Cognition, Education, and Multimedia: Exploring Ideas in High Technology (pp. 115-141). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1994). The concept anchoring routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Deshler, D., Schumaker, J., Bulgren, J., Lenz, K., Jantzen, J., Adams, G., et al. (2001). Making learning easier: Connecting new knowledge to things students already know. Teaching Exceptional Children, 33(4), 82-85. 
Dickey, M. D. (2005). Engaging by design: How engagement strategies in popular computer and video games can inform instructional design. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(2), 67-83. 
Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the concept, state of the evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59-109. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Alao, S. (1997). Designing contexts to increase motivations for reading. Educational Psychologist, 32(2), 95-105. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Davis, M. H. (2003). Motivating struggling readers in middle school through an engagement model of classroom practice. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(1), 59. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Wigfield, A. (2000). Engagement and motivation in reading. In M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook for reading research (pp. 403-422). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Heckman, P. E., & Weissglass, J. (1994). Contextualized mathematics instruction: Moving beyond recent proposals. For the Learning of Mathematics, 14(1), 29-33. 
Johnson, S. C. (1995). Making a place for music in basic writing. Journal of Basic Writing, 14(2), 31-
37. 
Kim, H. S., & Kamil, M. L. (2003). Concept-oriented reading instruction. In A. P. Sweet, & C. E. Snow (Eds.), Rethinking reading comprehension (pp. 115-140). NY: Guilford Press. 
Kinzer, C. K., Gabella, M. S., & Rieth, H. J. (1994). An argument for using multimedia and anchored instruction to facilitate mildly disabled students' learning of literacy and social studies. Technology and Disability, 3(2), 117-128. 
Kolb, L. (2006). From toy to tool: Audioblogging with cell phones. Learning & Leading with Technology, 34(3), 16-20. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Powell-Brown, A. (2006). Why can't I just see the movie? Fostering motivation in children who struggle with reading. Intervention in School and Clinic, 42(2), 84-90. 
Prensky, M. (2005). Listen to the natives. Learning, 63(4), 8-13. 
Reinking, D. (2001). Multimedia and engaged reading in a digital world. In L. Verhoeven, & C. Snow (Eds.), Literacy and motivation: Reading engagement in individuals and groups (pp. 195-221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Scott, L. G. (1996). Writing to music. Reading Teacher, 50, 173-174. 
Smith, J. L., & Herring, J. D. (1996). Literature alive: Connecting to story through the arts. Reading Horizons, 37(2), 102-115. 
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1990). Anchored instruction and its relationship to situated cognition. Educational Researcher, 19(6), 2-10. 
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1993). Anchored instruction and its relationship to situated cognition revisited. Educational Researcher, 33(3), 52-70. 
Xin, F. (1996). Multimedia reading: Using anchored instruction and video technology in vocabulary lessons. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29(2), 45-49. 
7.3: Minimize threats and distractions 
The following experimental and quantitative evidence illustrates the importance of creating learning environments that vary in their perceived threats and distractions in order to increase student engagement and achievement. A majority of studies focus upon the advantage of positive behavior support as a way to deter behavior that distracts from learning. Other studies investigate the benefits of extrinsic rewards to develop intrinsic motivation. Finally, other articles examine the impact of music, noise, and unfamiliar environments and school personnel upon student learning. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions focus primarily upon positive behavior support and the importance of creating non-threatening educational settings for students. 
7.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and intrinsic motivation: A metaanalysis. Review of Educational Research, 64(3), 363-423. 
Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (2006). Rewards and intrinsic motivation: Resolving the controversy. Charlotte, North Carolina: Information Age Publishing. 
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2005). Engagement, disengagement, coping, and catastrophe. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 527-547). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Cassidy, G. (2007). The effect of background music and background noise on the task performance of introverts and extraverts. Psychology of Music, 35(3), 517-537. 
Dalla Bella, S., Perets, I., Rousseau, L., & Gosselin, N. (2001). A developmental study of the affective value of tempo and mode in music. Cognition, 80(3), B1-B10. 
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 627-668. 
Deci, E. L. (2001). Extrinsic rewards and intrinsic motivation in education: Reconsidered once again. Review of Educational Research, 71(1), 1-27. 
Flink, C., Boggiano, A. K., & Barrett, M. (1990). Controlling teaching strategies: Undermining children's self-determination and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(5), 916-924. 
Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions? Review of General Psychology, 2(3), 300-319. 
Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and thought-action repertoires. Cognition and Emotion, 19(3), 313-332. 
Fuchs, D. (1985). The effect of examiners' personal familiarity and professional experience on handicapped children's test performance. Journal of Educational Research, 78(3), 141-146. 
Fuchs, D. (1987). Effects of examiner familiarity on LD and MR students' language performance. Remedial and Special Education (RASE), 8(4), 47-52. 
Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L. S. (1986). Test procedure bias: A meta-analysis of examiner familiarity effects. Review of Educational Research, 56(2), 243-262. 
Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L. S. (1989). Effects of examiner familiarity on Black, Caucasian, and Hispanic children: A meta-analysis. Exceptional Children, 55(4), 303-308. 
Fuchs, D., Zern, D. S., & Fuchs, L. S. (1983). A microanalysis of participant behavior in familiar and unfamiliar test conditions. Exceptional Children, 50(1), 75-77. 
Furnham, A., & Strbac, L. (2002). Music is as distracting as noise: The differential distraction of background music and noise on the cognitive test performance of introverts and extraverts. Ergonomics, 45(3), 203-217. 
Hickey, D., & McCaslin, M. (2001). A comparative, sociocultural analysis of context and motivation. In S. Volet, & S. Jarvela (Eds.), Motivation in context: Theoretical advances and methodological implications (pp. 33-55). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press. 
Hutchinson, M., & Gul, F. A. (1997). The interactive effects of extroversion/introversion traits and collectivism/individualism cultural beliefs on student group learning preferences. Journal of Accounting Education, 15(1), 95-107. 
Immordino-Yang, M. H., & Damasio, A. R. (2007). We feel, therefore we learn: The relevance of affective and social neuroscience to education. Mind, Brain, and Education, 1(1), 3-10. 
Iyengar, S., & Lepper, M. (1999). Rethinking the value of choice: A cultural perspective on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(3), 349-366. 
Kincaid, D., Knoster, T., Harrower, J. K., Shannon, P., & Bustamante, S. (2002). Measuring the impact of positive behavior support. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 4(2), 109-117. 
Luiselli, J. K., Putnam, R. F., & Sunderland, M. (2002). Longitudinal evaluation of behavior support intervention in a public middle school. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 4(3), 182-188. 
Mayer, R. E., Sobko, K., & Mautone, P. D. (2003). Social cues in multimedia learning: Role of speaker's voice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 419-425. 
McCurdy, B. L., Mannella, M. C., & Eldridge, N. (2003). Positive behavior support in urban schools: Can we prevent the escalation of antisocial behavior. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 5(3), 158-170. 
Mendes, W. B., Blascovich, J., Hunter, S. B., Lickel, B., & Jost, J. T. (2007). Threatened by the unexpected: Physiological responses during social interactions with expectancy-violating partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(4), 698-716. 
Metzler, C. W., Biglan, A., Rusby, J. C., & Sprague, J. R. (2001). Evaluation of a comprehensive behavior management program to improve school-wide positive behavior support. Education and Treatment of Children, 24(4), 448-479. 
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2000). A coherence effect in multimedia learning: The case for minimizing irrelevant sounds in the design of multimedia instructional messages. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(1), 117-125. 
Nelson, J. R., Martella, R., & Marchand-Martella, N. (2002). Maximizing student learning: The effects of a comprehensive school-based program for preventing problem behaviors. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral, 10(3), 136-148. 
Pappamihiel, N. E. (2001). Moving from the ESL classroom into the mainstream: An investigation of English language anxiety in Mexican girls. Bilingual Research Journal, 25(1/2), 31-38. 
Skinner, E. A., Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., & Connell, J. P. (1998). Individual differences and the development of perceived control. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(2-3), i-vi, 1-220. 
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist, 52(6), 613-629. 
Stipek, D. J. (1996). Motivation and instruction. In D. C. Berliner, & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology. (pp. 85-113). New York: Simon & Schuster/Macmillan. 
Van Eck, R. (2006). The effect of contextual pedagogical advisement and competition on middleschool students' attitude toward mathematics and mathematics instruction using a computerbased simulation game. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 25(2), 165-195. 
Weinstein, C. S. (1979). The physical environment of the school: A review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 49(4), 577-610. 
Wiersma, U. J. C. (1992). The effects of extrinsic reward on intrinsic motivation: A meta-analysis. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65(2), 101-114. 
Wiest, L. R. (2002). Aspects of word-problem context that influence children's problem-solving performance. Focus on Learning Problems in Mathematics, 24(2), 38-52. 
Zins, J. E., Bloodworth, M. R., Weissberg, R. P., & Walberg, H. J. (2004). The scientific base linking social and emotional learning to school success. In J. E. Zins, R. P. Weissberg, M. C. Wang & H. J. Walberg (Eds.), Building Academic Success on Social and Emotional Learning: What Does the Research Say? (pp. 3-22). New York: Teachers College Press. 
7.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Cameron, J. (2001). Negative effects of reward on intrinsic motivation-A limited phenomenon: 
Comment on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (2001). Review of Educational Research, 71(1), 29-42. 
Cameron, J., Banko, K. M., & Pierce, W. D. (2001). Pervasive negative effects of rewards on intrinsic motivation: The myth continues. The Behavior Analyst, 24, 1-44. 
Corey, R. (1995). Words from music: How Mozart and mangione inspire writers. Quarterly of the National Writing Project and the Center for the Study of Writing and Literacy, 17(3), 26-29. 
Darch, C. B., & Kameenui, E. J. (2003). Instructional classroom management: A proactive approach to behavior management (2nd ed.). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Deci, E. L. (2001). The pervasive negative effects of rewards on intrinsic motivation: Response to Cameron (2001). Review of Educational Research, 71(1), 43-51. 
Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emotion, 7(2), 336-353. 
Greenberg, M. T., Weissberg, R. P., O'Brien, M. U., Zins, J. E., Fredericks, L., Resnik, H., et al. (2003). Enhancing school-based prevention and youth development through coordinated social, emotional, and academic learning. American Psychologist, 58(6/7), 466-474. 
Horner, R. H., & Sugai, G. (2001). "Data" need not be a four-letter word: Using data to improve schoolwide discipline. Beyond Behavior, 11(1), 20-22. 
Horner, R. H., Sugai, G., & Horner, H. F. (2000). A school-wide approach to student discipline. The School Administrator, 2(57), 20-23. 
Horner, R. H., Sugai, G., Lewis-Palmer, T., & Todd, A. W. (2001). Teaching school-wide behavioral expectations. Report on Emotional & Behavioral Disorders in Youth, 1(4), 77-79. 
Horner, R. H., Todd, A. W., Lewis-Palmer, T., Irvin, L. K., Sugai, G., & Boland, J. B. (2004). The schoolwide evaluation tool (SET): A research instrument for assessing school-wide positive behavior support. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 6(1), 3-12. 
Horner, R. H., & Sugai, G. (2000). School-wide behavior support: An emerging initiative. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions, 2(4), 231-233. 
Horner, R. H., Sugai, G., Todd, A., & Lewis-Palmer, T. (2005). School-wide positive behavior support: An alternative approach to discipline in schools. In L. Bambara, & L. Kern (Eds.), 
Individualized support for students with problem behaviors: Designing positive behavior plans (pp. 359390). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Mcleskey, J., & Waldron, N. L. (2007). Making differences ordinary in inclusive classrooms. Intervention in School and Clinic, 42(3), 162-168. 
Meyer, A. (1983). Origins and prevention of emotional disturbances among learning disabled children. Topics in Learning & Learning Disabilities, 3(2), 59-70. 
Netzel, D., & Eber, L. (2003). Shifting from reactive & proactive discipline in an urban school district: A change in focus through PBIS. Journal of Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports, 5(2), 67-71. 
Scott, T. M., & Barrett, S. B. (2004). Using staff and student time engaged in disciplinary procedures to evaluate the impact of school-wide PBS. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 6(1), 21-28. 
Scott, L. G. (1996). Writing to music. Reading Teacher, 50, 173-174. 
Sugai, G., Horner, R. H., & Gresham, F. (2002). Behaviorally effective school environments. In M. R. 
Shinn, H. M. Walker, & G. Stoner (Eds.), Interventions for academic and behavior problems II: Preventive and remedial approaches (pp. 315-350). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
8.1: Heighten salience of goals and objectives 
Maintaining engagement over the course of any sustained lesson or project can be difficult for many learners. Research shows the importance of incorporating periodic or persistent "reminders" of both the goal and its value in order to support students in sustaining effort and concentration in the face of attractive distracters. The majority of the experimental studies listed here evaluate the effectiveness of various specific techniques for doing so: persistent display (concrete or symbolic) of the goal, prompts or scaffolds for visualizing desired outcomes, and rubrics to explicitly state goals and objectives. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on providing options to heighten salience of goals and objectives. Many of the articles listed here focus upon the use of rubrics in the classroom and offer an array of practical examples. 
8.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Aboderin, A. O., & Thomas, M. (1996). An evaluation of the influence of behavioural objectives on Nigerian students' cognitive achievement in biology. Research in Science & Technological Education, 14(2), 193-204. 
Andrade, H. G. (1999, April). The role of instructional rubrics and self-assessment in learning to write: A smorgasbord of findings. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Quebec. 
Barker, D., & Hapkiewicz, W. G. (1979). The effects of behavioral objectives on relevant and incidental learning at two levels of Bloom's Taxonomy. Journal of Educational Research, 72(6), 334339. 
Blaney, J. P., & McKie, D. (1969). Knowledge of conference objectives and effect upon learning. Adult Education Quarterly, 19(2), 98-105. 
Dales, G. T. (1970). Effect of precise objectives upon student achievement in health education. Journal of Experimental Education, 39(2), 20-23. 
Duchastel, P. C., & Merrill, P. F. (1973). The effects of behavioral objectives on learning: A review of empirical studies. Review of Educational Research, 43(1), 53-69. 
Duffy, G. G., Roehler, L. R., & Rackliffe, G. (1986). How teachers' instructional talk influences students' understanding of lesson content. The Elementary School Journal, 87(1), 3-16. 
Hafner, J. C., & Hafner, P. M. (2003). Quantitative analysis of the rubric as an assessment tool: An empirical study of student peer-group rating. International Journal of Science Education, 25(12), 1509-1528. 
Hartley, J., & Davies, I. K. (1976). Preinstructional strategies: The role of pretests, behavioral objectives, overviews and advance organizers. Review of Educational Research, 46(2), 239-265. 
McLeod, P. J., Berdugo, G., & Meagher, T. W. (1998). Utility of educational objectives: A study of learner and program director perceptions of their value in clinical courses. Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 10(3), 152-157. 
Orsmond, P., Merry, S., & Reiling, K. (2002). The use of exemplars and formative feedback when using student derived marking criteria in peer and self-assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 27(4), 309-323. 
Rothkopf, E. Z., & Kaplan, R. (1972). Exploration of the effect of density and specificity of instructional objectives on learning from text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 63(4), 295-302. 
Schuck, R. F. (1971). The effects of set induction upon pupil achievement, retention, and assessment of effective teaching in a unit on respiration in the BSCS curricula. Science Education, 55(3), 403-415. 
Schultheiss, O. C., & Brunstein, J. C. (1999). Goal imagery: Bridging the gap between implicit motives and explicit goals. Journal of Personality, 67(1), 1-38. 
Skillings, M. J., & Ferrell, R. (2000). Student-generated rubrics: Bringing students into the assessment process. The Reading Teacher, 53(6), 452-455. 
Sweller, J., & Levine, M. (1982). Effects of goal specificity on means-ends analysis and learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8(5), 463-474. 
Wittrock, M. C. (1962). Set applied to student teaching. Human Learning in the School: Readings in Educational Psychology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 53(4), 175-180. 
8.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Ainsworth, L., & Christinson, J. (1998). Student generated rubrics: An assessment model to help all students succeed. Parsippany, NJ: Pearson Learning. 
Andrade, H., & Du, Y. (2005). Student perspectives on rubric-referenced assessment. Practical Assessment Research & Evaluation, 10(3), 2-11. 
Andrade, H. G. (2000). Using rubrics to promote thinking and learning. Educational Leadership, 57(5), 13-18. 
Andrade, H. G. (2005). Teaching with rubrics: The good, the bad, and the ugly. College Teaching, 53(1), 27-30. 
Arter, J. A., & McTighe, J. (2001). Scoring rubrics in the classroom: Using performance criteria for assessing and improving student performance. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 
Boston, C. (2002). Understanding scoring rubrics: A guide for teachers. College Park, Maryland: ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and Evaluation. 
Clauson, D. J. (1998). How rubrics become grades. Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, 4(2), 118-119. 
Coray, G. (2000). Rubrics made simple. Science Scope, 23(6), 38-40. 
Custer, R. L. (1996). Rubrics: An authentic assessment tool for technology education. Technology Teacher, 55(4), 27-37. 
Eisner, E. W. (1967). Instructional and expressive educational objectives: Their formulation and use in curriculum. In W. J. Popham (Ed.), Instructional objectives (pp. 1-31). Chicago: Rand Mc Nally. 
Eppink, J. A. (2002). Student-created rubrics: An idea that works. Teaching Music, 9(4), 28-32. 
Farnham-Diggory, S. (1972). Cognitive processes in education: A psychological preparation for teaching and curriculum development. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. 
Fuchs, L. S., & Deno, S. L. (1982). Developing goals and objectives for educational programs. Washington, D.C.: American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education. 
Goodrich, H. (1997). Understanding rubrics. Educational Leadership, 54(5), 14-17. 
Groeber, J. F. (2006). Designing and using rubrics for reading and language arts, K-6 (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 
Guthrie, J. T. (2000). Contexts for engagement and motivation in reading. Reading Online 4(8). 
Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/handbook/guthrie/. 
Hall, E. W., & Salmon, S. J. (2003). Chocolate chip cookies and rubrics: Helping students understand rubrics in inclusive settings. Teaching Exceptional Children, 35(4), 8-11. 
Hidi, S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2000). Motivating the academically unmotivated: A critical issue for the 21st century. Review of Educational Research, 70(2), 151-179. 
Huffman, E. S. (1998). Authentic rubrics. Art Education, 51(1), 64-68. 
Jackson, C. W., & Larkin, M. J. (2002). Rubric: Teaching students to use grading rubrics. Teaching Exceptional Children, 35(1), 40-45. 
Jensen, K. (1995). Effective rubric design: Making the most of this powerful assessment tool. Science Teacher, 62(5), 34-37. 
Kohn, A. (2006). The trouble with rubrics. English Journal, 95(4), 12-15. 
Lazear, D. (1998). The rubrics way: Using multiple intelligences to assess understanding. Tucson, AZ: Zephyr Press. 
Leonhardt, A. (2005). Using rubrics as an assessment tool in your classroom. General Music Today, 19(1), 10-16. 
Liu, K. (1995). Rubrics revisited: Allowing students to assume responsibility for the quality of their work. Science Teacher, 62(7), 49-51. 
Loveland, T. R. (2005). Writing standards-based rubrics for technology education classrooms: The use of rubrics goes beyond the simple need for objective grading in classrooms. Technology Teacher, 4(2), 19-23. 
Lynch, V. (1983). An introduction to systematic instruction. BC Journal of Special Education, 7(1), 1-
13. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Mertler, C. A. (2001). Designing scoring rubrics for your classroom. Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation, 7(25), 1-10. 
Moskal, B. M. (2000). Scoring rubrics: what, when and how? Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 7(3). Retrieved May 22, 2009, from http://PAREonline.net/getvn.asp?v=7&n=3. 
Phillip, C. (2002). Clear expectations: Rubrics and scoring guides. Knowledge Quest, 31(2), 26-27. 
Popham, W. J. (1997). What's wrong--and what's right--with rubrics. Educational Leadership, 55(2), 72-75. 
Reddin, W. J. (1971). Effective management by objectives. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Ross-Fisher, R. L. (2005). Developing effective success rubrics. Kappa Delta Pi Record, 41(3), 131135. 
Schirmer, B. R., & Bailey, J. (2000). Writing assessment rubric: An instructional approach with struggling writers. Teaching Exceptional Children, 33(1), 52-58. 
Spandel, V. (2006). In defense of rubrics. English Journal, 96(1), 19-22. 
Tuttle, H. G. (1996). The multimedia report: Rubrics--keys to improving multimedia presentations. MultiMedia Schools, 3(1), 30-33. 
Wang, J., & Rairigh, R. M. (2006). Using instructional rubrics in physical education. Teaching Elementary Physical Education, 17(3), 37-41. 
Wyngaard, S., & Gehrke, R. (1996). Responding to audience: Using rubrics to teach and assess writing. English Journal, 85(6), 67-70. 
Yoshina, J. M., & Harada, V. H. (2007). Involving students in learning through rubrics. Library Media Connection, 25(5), 10-14. 
8.2: Vary demands and resources to optimize challenge 
There is incredible amount of variability among students in terms of how they perceive and respond to challenging tasks. Some students are motivated by highly challenging or highly risky tasks, while others are more motivated by more predictable, "safer" tasks that are well within their capability. Providing a range of challenges, and a range of possible supports, allows all students to find objectives that are optimally motivating. The experimental research listed here explores the effects of optimizing resources and demands, and teaching within a student's Zone of Proximal Development. Many of the scholarly reviews and expert opinions offer a more classroom-based perspective on challenge and threat appraisals, while Vygotsky's work offers a theoretical perspective on the importance of providing options to vary the level of challenge and support. 
8.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Blascovich, J., Mendes, W. B., Hunter, S. B., & Salomon, K. (1999). Social" facilitation" as challenge and threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(1), 68-77. 
Boggiano, A. K., Main, D. S., & Katz, P. A. (1988). Children's preference for challenge: The role of perceived competence and control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 134-141. 
Craig, S. D., Graesser, A. C., Sullins, J., & Gholson, B. (2004). Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the role of affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of Educational Media, 29(3), 241-250. 
Donovan, C. A., Smolkin, L. B., & Lomax, R. G. (2000). Beyond the independent-level text: 
Considering the reader? Text match in first graders' self-selections during recreational reading. Reading Psychology, 21(4), 309-333. 
Drach-Zahavy, A., & Erez, M. (2002). Challenge versus threat effects on the goal-performance relationship. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 88(2), 667-682. 
Folkman, S., Lazarus, R. S., Dunkel-Schetter, C., DeLongis, A., & Gruen, R. J. (1986). Dynamics of a stressful encounter: Cognitive appraisal, coping, and encounter outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(5), 992-1003. 
Mak, A. S., Blewitt, K., & Heaven, P. C. L. (2004). Gender and personality influences in adolescent threat and challenge appraisals and depressive symptoms. Personality and Individual Differences, 36(6), 1483-1496. 
Marino, M., Coyne, M., & Dunn, M. (2010). The effect of technology-based altered readability levels on struggling readers science comprehension. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 29(1), 31-49. 
Montague, M., & Applegate, B. (2000). Middle school students' perceptions, persistence, and performance in mathematical problem solving. Learning Disability Quarterly, 23(3), 215-227. 
Oermann, M. H., & Standfest, K. M. (1997). Differences in stress and challenge in clinical practice among ADN and BSN students in varying clinical courses. The Journal of Nursing Education, 36(5), 228-233. 
Ohta, A. S. (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learnerlearner collaborative interaction in the Zone of Proximal Development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 93-121. 
Pagana, K. D. (1990). The relationship of hardiness and social support to student appraisal of stress in an initial clinical nursing situation. The Journal of Nursing Education, 29(6), 255-261. 
Salomon, G., Globerson, T., & Guterman, E. (1989). The computer as a Zone of Proximal Development: Internalizing reading-related metacognitions from a reading partner. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(4), 620-627. 
Stahl, E., Pieschl, S., & Bromme, R. (2006). Task complexity, epistemological beliefs and metacognitive calibration: An exploratory study. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35(4), 319-338. 
Tang, S. Y. F. (2003). Challenge and support: The dynamics of student teachers' professional learning in the field experience. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19(5), 483-498. 
Tomaka, J., Blascovich, J., Kibler, J., & Ernst, J. M. (1997). Cognitive and physiological antecedents of threat and challenge appraisal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(1), 63-72. 
Tomaka, J., Blascovich, J., Kelsey, R. M., & Leitten, C. L. (1993). Subjective, physiological, and behavioral effects of threat and challenge appraisal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(2), 248-260. 
Vick, S. B., Seery, M. D., Blascovich, J., & Weisbuch, M. (2008). The effect of gender stereotype activation on challenge and threat motivational states. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44(3), 624-630. 
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100. 
8.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2000). Challenge and threat appraisals: The role of affective cues. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking: The role of affect in social cognition (pp. 59-82). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Brabham, E. G., & Villaume, S. K. (2002). Leveled text: The good news and the bad news. Reading Teacher, 55(5), 438-441. 
Coyne, M. D., Kame'enui, E. J., & Simmons, D. C. (2004). Improving beginning reading instruction and intervention for students with LD: Reconciling" all" with" each". Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37(3), 231. 
Hedegaard, M. (1996). The Zone of Proximal Development as basis for instruction. In H. Daniels (Ed.), An introduction to Vygotsky (pp. 171-195). London: Routledge. 
Onosko, J. J., & Jorgenson, C. M. (1998). Unit and lesson planning in the inclusive classroom: Maximizing learning opportunities for all students. In C. M. Jorgenson (Ed.), Restructuring high schools for all students: Taking inclusion to the next level (pp. 71-105). Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Suarez, D. (2007). When students choose the challenge. Educational Leadership, 65(3), 60-65. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1964). Thought and language. Annals of Dyslexia, 14(1), 97-98. 
8.3: Foster collaboration and community 
For some, but not all, students, the option of working collaboratively with other students is an effective way to sustain engagement in protracted projects and activities. The distribution of mentoring through peers can greatly increase the opportunities for one-on-one support. The experimental and quantitative research presented here supports the effectiveness of strategies such as cooperative learning groups with scaffolded roles and responsibilities, school-wide programs of positive behavior support with differentiated objectives and supports, and peer tutoring and support. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on the benefits of providing options to foster collaboration and communication. 
8.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bahr, M. W., Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Fernstrom, P., & Stecker, P. M. (1993). Reflections on "Effectiveness of student versus teacher monitoring during prereferral intervention." Exceptionality, 4(1), 55-58. 
Bentz, J. L., & Fuchs, L. S. (1996). Improving peers' helping behavior to students with learning disabilities during mathematics peer tutoring. Learning Disability Quarterly, 19(4), 202-215. 
Calhoon, M. B., & Fuchs, L. S. (2003). The effects of peer-assisted learning strategies and curriculum-based measurement on the mathematics performance of secondary students with disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 24(4), 235-245. 
Catlin, K. S., Lewan, G. J., & Perignon, B. J. (1999). Increasing student engagement through goalsetting, cooperative learning & student choice. Unpublished master's action research project, St. 
Xavier University and IRI/SkyLight, Chicago, IL. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED433100) Retrieved July 16, 2009, from ERIC database. 
Daiute, C., & Dalton, B. (1993). Collaboration between children learning to write: Can novices be masters? Cognition & Instruction, 10(4), 281-333. 
Dion, E., Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L. S. (2005). Differential effects of peer-assisted learning strategies on students' social preference and friendship making. Behavioral Disorders, 30(4), 421-429. 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L., Yen, L., McMaster, K., Svenson, E., Yang, N., et al. (2001). Developing firstgrade reading fluency through peer mediation. Teaching Exceptional Children, 34(2), 90-93. 
Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L. S. (2005). Peer-assisted learning strategies: Promoting word recognition, fluency, and reading comprehension in young children. The Journal of Special Education, 39(1), 34-
44. 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., & Burish, P. (2000). Peer-assisted learning strategies: An evidence-based practice to promote reading achievement. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 15(2), 85-91. 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Mathes, P. G., & Martinez, E. A. (2002). Preliminary evidence on the social standing of students with learning disabilities in PALS and no-PALS classrooms. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(4), 205-215. 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Mathes, P. G., & Simmons, D. C. (1997). Peer-assisted learning strategies: Making classrooms more responsive to diversity. American Educational Research Journal, 34(1), 174. 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Thompson, A., Svenson, E., Yen, L., Al Otaiba, S., et al. (2001). Peer-assisted learning strategies in reading: Extensions for kindergarten, first grade, and high school. Remedial and Special Education, 22(1), 15-21. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Bentz, J., Phillips, N. B., & Hamlett, C. L. (1994). The nature of student interactions during peer tutoring with and without prior training and experience. American Educational Research Journal, 31(1), 75-103. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. L., Phillips, N. B., Karns, K., & Dutka, S. (1997). Enhancing students' helping behavior during peer-mediated instruction with conceptual mathematical explanations. The Elementary School Journal, 97(3), 223-249. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., & Karns, K. (2001). Enhancing kindergartners' mathematical development: Effects of peer-assisted learning strategies. The Elementary School Journal, 101(5), 495-510. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Karns, K., Hamlett, C., Katzaroff, M., & Dutka, S. (1998). Comparisons among individual and cooperative performance assessments and other measures of mathematics competence. The Elementary School Journal, 99(1), 23-51. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., & Kazdan, S. (1999). Effects of peer-assisted learning strategies on high school students with serious reading problems. Remedial and Special Education, 20(5), 309-318. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Kazdan, S., & Allen, S. (1999). Effects of peer-assisted learning strategies in reading with and without training in elaborated help giving. The Elementary School Journal, 99(3), 201-219. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Kazdan, S., Karns, K., Calhoon, M. B., Hamlett, C. L., et al. (2000). Effects of workgroup structure and size on student productivity during collaborative work on complex tasks. The Elementary School Journal, 100(3), 183-212. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Phillips, N. B., Hamlett, C. L., & Karns, K. (1995). Acquisition and transfer effects of classwide peer-assisted learning strategies in mathematics for students with varying learning histories. School Psychology Review, 24(4), 604-620. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Yazdian, L., & Powell, S. R. (2002). Enhancing first-grade children's mathematical development with peer-assisted learning strategies. School Psychology Review, 31(4), 569-584. 
Gersten, R. (1998). Recent advances in instructional research for students with learning disabilities: An overview. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(3), 162-170. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Harris, K. R., Graham, S., & Mason, L. H. (2006). Improving the writing, knowledge, and motivation of struggling young writers: Effects of self-regulated strategy development with and without peer support. American Educational Research Journal, 43(2), 295-340. 
Hock, M. F., Pulvers, K. A., & Deshler, D. D. (2001). The effects of an after-school tutoring program on the academic performance of at-risk students and students with LD. Remedial and Special Education, 22(3), 172-186. 
Johnson, D., Maruyama, G., Johnson, R., Nelson, D., & Skon, L. (1981). Effects of cooperative, competitive, and individualistic goal structures on achievement: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 89(1), 47-62. 
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. (1998). Cooperative learning and social interdependence theory. In R. Tindale, L. Heath, J. Edwards, E. Posavac, F. Bryant & Y. e. a. Suzrez-Balcazar (Eds.), Theory and research on small groups: Social psychological applications to social issues (pp. 9-36). New York: Plenum Press. 
Kobayashi, M. (2003). The role of peer support in ESL students' accomplishment of oral academic tasks. Canadian Modern Language Review/La Revue Canadienne Des Langues Vivantes, 59(3), 337369. 
Locke, W. R., & Fuchs, L. S. (1995). Effects of peer-mediated reading instruction on the on-task behavior and social interaction of children with behavior disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 3(2), 92-99. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1991). Effects of a reciprocal peer revision strategy in special education classrooms. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 6(4), 201-210. 
Mathes, P., Howard, J., Allen, S., & Fuchs, D. (1998). Peer-assisted learning strategies for firstgrade readers: Responding to the needs of diverse learners. Reading Research Quarterly, 33(1), 62-94. 
Mathes, P. G., & Fuchs, L. S. (1993). Peer-mediated reading instruction in special education resource rooms. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 8(4), 233-243. 
McMaster, K. L., Fuchs, D., & Fuchs, L. S. (2006). Research on peer-assisted learning strategies: The promise and limitations of peer-mediated instruction. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 22(1), 5-25. 
McMaster, K. N., & Fuchs, D. (2002). Effects of cooperative learning on the academic achievement of students with learning disabilities: An update of tateyama-sniezek's review. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(2), 107-117. 
Ohta, A. S. (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learnerlearner collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 93-121. 
Orsmond, P., Merry, S., & Reiling, K. (2002). The use of exemplars and formative feedback when using student derived marking criteria in peer and self-assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 27(4), 309-323. 
Phillips, N. B. (1993). Combining classwide curriculum-based measurement and peer tutoring to help general educators provide adaptive education. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 8(3), 148-156. 
Phillips, N. B., Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (1994). Effects of classwide curriculum-based measurement and peer tutoring: A collaborative researcher-practitioner interview study. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27(7), 420-434. 
Riddle, E. M. (1995). Communication through multimedia in an elementary classroom. East Lansing, MI: National Center for Research on Teacher Learning. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED384346) Retrieved July 16, 2009, from ERIC database. 
Rohrbeck, C. A., Fantuzzo, J. W., Ginsburg-Block, M. D., & Miller, T. R. (2003). Peer-assisted learning interventions with elementary school students: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 240-257. 
Simmons, D. C. (1994). Importance of instructional complexity and role reciprocity to classwide peer tutoring. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 9(4), 203-212. 
Simmons, D. C., Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Mathes, P., & Hodge, J. P. (1995). Effects of explicit teaching and peer tutoring on the reading achievement of learning-disabled and low-performing students in regular classrooms. The Elementary School Journal, 95(5), 387-408. 
Stenhoff, D., & Lignugaris/Kraft, B. (2007). A review of the effects of peer tutoring on students with mild disabilities in secondary settings. Council for Exceptional Children, 74(1), 8-30. 
Stevens, R. J., & Slavin, R. E. (1995). The cooperative elementary school: Effects on students' achievement, attitudes, and social relations. American Educational Research Journal, 32(2), 321-351. 
Stoddard, B., & MacArthur, C. A. (1993). A peer editor strategy: Guiding learning-disabled students in response and revision. Research in the Teaching of English, 27(1), 76-103. 
Topping, K. J., Peter, C., Stephen, P., & Whale, M. (2004). Cross-age peer tutoring of science in the primary school: Influence on scientific language and thinking. Educational Psychology, 24(1), 57-75. 
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100. 
Xin, J. F. (1999). Computer-assisted cooperative learning in integrated classrooms for students with and without disabilities. Information Technology in Childhood Education, 1(1), 61-78. 
8.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Agran, M., King-Sears, M. E., Wehmeyer, M. L., & Copeland, S. R. (2003). Teachers' guide to inclusive practices: Student directed learning. Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (2000). Building student capacity to work productively during peerassisted reading activities. In B. M. Taylor, M. F. Graves & P. van den Broek (Eds.), Reading for meaning: Fostering comprehension in the middle grades. (pp. 95-115). New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Alao, S. (1997). Designing contexts to increase motivations for reading. Educational Psychologist, 32(2), 95-105. 
Hall, T. E., & Stegila, A. (2003). Peer-mediated instruction and intervention. Retrieved on May 27, 2009, from https://guide.swiftschools.org/resource/237/peer-mediated-instruction-andintervention. 
Hall, T. E., Wolfe, P. S., & Bollig, A. A. (2003). The home-to-school notebook: An effective communication strategy for students with severe disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 36(2), 68-73. 
Ikan, P. A., & Conderman, G. (1996). Lights, camera, action!: A language arts activity for middle school students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 28(4), 69-71. 
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1999). Learning together and alone: Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic learning. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
MacArthur, C. (1994). Peers + word processing + strategies= A powerful combination for revising student writing. Teaching Exceptional Children, 27(1), 24-29. 
Marzano, R. J., Pickering, D. J., & Pollock, J. E. (2001). Classroom instruction that works: Researchedbased strategies for increasing student achievement. Virginia: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Mastropieri, M. A., Scruggs, T. E., & Graetz, J. E. Reading comprehension instruction for secondary students: Challenges for struggling readers and teachers. Reading Disability Quarterly, 26(1), 103116. 
Onosko, J. J., & Jorgenson, C. M. (1998). Unit and lesson planning in the inclusive classroom: Maximizing learning opportunities for all students. In C. M. Jorgenson (Ed.), Restructuring high schools for all students: Taking inclusion to the next level (pp. 71-105). Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Powell-Brown, A. (2006). Why can't I just see the movie? Fostering motivation in children who struggle with reading. Intervention in School and Clinic, 42(2), 84-90. 
Robinson, D. R., Schofield, J. W., & Steers-Wentzell1, K. L. (2005). Peer and cross-age tutoring in math: Outcomes and their design implications. Educational Psychology Review, 17(4), 327-362. 
Saenz, L. M., Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (2005). Peer-assisted learning strategies for English language learners with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 71(3), 231-248. 
Strangman, N. (2002). Collaborative internet projects: An interview with Susan Silverman about her passion and hobby. Reading Online, 5(6). Retrieved on May 27, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/voices/silverman/. 
Topping, K. J. (2005). Trends in peer learning. Educational Psychology, 25(6), 631-645. 
Wright, J., & Cleary, K. S. (2006). Kids in the tutor seat: Building schools' capacity to help struggling readers through a cross-age peer-tutoring program. Psychology in the Schools, 43(1), 99-107. 
8.4: Increase mastery-oriented feedback 
Feedback that orients students toward mastery and that emphasizes the role of effort and practice rather than "intelligence" or inherent "ability" is an important factor in guiding students toward successful long-term habits of mind. The experimental and quantitative evidence listed here reveals the advantages of strategies such as providing feedback that encourages perseverance, focusing on development of efficacy and self-awareness, encouraging the use of specific supports in the face of challenge, and emphasizing individual effort rather than relative performance. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions offer more classroom-based perspectives on the importance of providing mastery-oriented feedback to students. 
8.4 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (1996). Multifaceted impact of selfefficacy beliefs on academic functioning. Child Development, 67(3), 1206-1222. 
Bangert-Downs, R. L., Kulik, C., Kulick, J. A., & Morgan, M. (1991). The instructional effects of feedback in test-like events. Review of Educational Research, 61(2), 213-238. 
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78(1), 246-263. 
Borkowski, J. G., Weyhing, R. S., & Turner, L. A. (1986). Attributional retraining and the teaching of strategies. Exceptional Children, 53(2), 130-137. 
Butler, R. (2005). Competence assessment, competence, and motivation between early and middle childhood. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 202-221). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Chapin, M., & Dyck, D. G. (1976). Persistence in children's reading behavior as a function of N length and attribution retraining. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 85(5), 511-515. 
Craske, M. L. (1988). Learned helplessness, self-worth motivation and attribution retraining for primary school children. The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 58 (Pt. 2), 152-164. 
Craven, R. G., Marsh, H. W., & Debus, R. L. (1991). Effects of internally focused feedback and attributional feedback on enhancement of academic self-concept. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(1), 17-27. 
Deci, E. L., & Moller, A. C. (2005). The concept of competence: A starting place for understanding intrinsic motivation and self-determined extrinsic motivation. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 579-597). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Duchardt, B. A., Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B. (1995). A strategic intervention for enabling students with learning disabilities to identify and change their ineffective beliefs. Learning Disability Quarterly, 18(3), 186-201. 
Dweck, C. S. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis Group. 
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95(2), 256-273. 
El-Alayli, A., & Baumgardner, A. (2003). If at first you don't succeed, what makes you try,try again? effects of implicit theories and ability feedback in a performance-oriented climate. Self & Identity, 2(2), 119-135. 
Fowler, J. W., & Peterson, P. L. (1981). Increasing reading persistence and altering attributional style of learned helpless children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73(2), 251-260. 
Fyrstén, S., Nurmi, J. E., & Lyytinen, H. (2006). The role of achievement beliefs and behaviours in spontaneous reading acquisition. Learning and Instruction, 16(6), 569-582. 
Heyman, G. D., Dweck, C. S., & Cain, K. M. (1992). Young children's vulnerability to self-blame and helplessness: Relationship to beliefs about goodness. Child Development, 63(2), 401-415. 
Horner, S. L., & Gaither, S. M. (2004). Attribution retraining instruction with a second-grade class. 
Early Childhood Education Journal, 31(3), 165-170. 
Hughes, C. A., Ruhl, K. L., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (2002). Effects of instruction in an assignment completion strategy on the homework performance of students with learning disabilities in general education classes. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice (Blackwell Publishing Limited), 17(1), 1-18. 
Kamins, M. L., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Person versus process praise and criticism: Implications for contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychology, 35(3), 835-847. 
Kennelly, K. J. (1981). Reinforcement schedules, effort vs. ability attributions, and persistence. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, Los Angeles, CA. 
Kline, F. M., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1991). Development and validation of feedback routines for instructing students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 14(3), 191207. 
Lackaye, T., Margalit, M., Ziv, O., & Ziman, T. (2006). Comparisons of self-efficacy, mood, effort, and hope between students with learning disabilities and their non-LD-matched peers. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 21(2), 111-121. 
Lee, J. K., & Lee, W. K. The relationship of e-Learner's self-regulatory efficacy and perception of elearning environmental quality. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(1), 32-47. 
Linnenbrick, E. A., & Pintrich, P. R. (2002). Motivation as an enabler for academic success. School Psychology Review, 31(3), 313-327. 
Linnenbrick, E. A., & Pintrich, P. R. (2003). The role of self-efficacy beliefs in student engagement and learning in the classroom. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 119-137. 
Loper, A. B. (1984). Accuracy of learning disabled students' self-prediction of decoding. Learning Disability Quarterly, 7(2), 172-178. 
Meltzer, L., Roditi, B., Houser, R. F., & Perlman, M. (1998). Perceptions of academic strategies and competence in students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 31(5), 437-451. 
Miserandino, M. (1996). Children who do well in school: Individual differences in perceived competence and autonomy in above-average children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(2), 203-214. 
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children's motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(1), 33-52. 
Okolo, C. M. (1992). The effects of computer-based attribution retraining on the attributions, persistence, and mathematics computation of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25(5), 327-334. 
Pajares, F., & Kranzler, J. (1995). Self-efficacy beliefs and general mental ability in mathematical problem-solving. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 20(4), 426-443. 
Pflaum, S. W., & Pascarella, E. T. (1982). Attribution retraining for learning disabled students: Some thoughts on the practical implications of the evidence. Learning Disability Quarterly, 5(4), 422-426. 
Ryan, R. M., & Grolnick, W. S. (1986). Origins and pawns in the classroom: Self-report and projective assessments of individual differences in children's perceptions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 550-558. 
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is "easy" and print is "tough": The differential investment of mental effort in learning as a function of perceptions and attributions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(4), 647-658. 
Schunk, D. H. (1982). Effects of effort attributional feedback on children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74(4), 548-556. 
Schunk, D. H. (1983). Ability versus effort attribution feedback: Differential effects on selfefficacy and achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75(6), 848-856. 
Schunk, D. H. (1984). Sequential attributional feedback and children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(6), 1159-1169. 
Schunk, D. H., & Cox, P. D. (1986). Strategy training and attributional feedback with learning disabled students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(3), 201-209. 
Schunk, D. H., & Pajares, F. (2005). Competence perceptions and academic functioning. In A. J. 
Elliot & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 85-104). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Schunk, D. H., & Rice, J. M. (1993). Strategy fading and progress feedback: Effects on self-efficacy and comprehension among students receiving remedial reading services. The Journal of Special Education, 27(3), 257-276. 
Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (1997). Developing self-efficacious readers and writers: The role of social and self-regulatory processes. In J. T. Guthrie, & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Reading engagement: Motivating readers through integrated instruction (pp. 34-50). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Shih, S. (2007). The role of motivational characteristics in taiwanese sixth graders' avoidance of help seeking in the classroom. Elementary School Journal, 107(5), 473-495. 
Stipek, D., & Heidi Gralinski, J. (1996). Children's beliefs about intelligence and school performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(3), 397-407. 
Stipek, D. J. (1996). Motivation and instruction. In D. C. Berliner, & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology. (pp. 85-113). New York: Simon & Schuster/Macmillan. 
Stipek, D. J., & Gralinski, J. H. (1991). Gender differences in children's achievement-related beliefs and emotional responses to success and failure in mathematics. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(3), 361-371. 
Surber, C. F. (1980). The development of reversible operations in judgments of ability, effort, and performance. Child Development, 51(4), 1018-1029. 
Thomas, A., & Pashley, B. (1982). Effects of classroom training on LD students' task persistence and attributions. Learning Disability Quarterly, 5(2), 133-144. 
Wolters, C. A., Yu, S. L., & Pintrich, P. R. (1996). The relation between goal orientation and students' motivational beliefs and self-regulated learning. Learning and Individual Differences, 8(3), 211-238. 
Yasutake, D. (1996). The effects of combining peer tutoring and attribution training on students' perceived self-competence. Remedial and Special Education, 17(2), 83-91. 
8.4 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Ames, C. A. (1990). Motivation: What teachers need to know. Teachers College Record, 91(3), 409421. 
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117-148. 
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman. 
Cimpian, A., Arce, H. M., Markman, E. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Subtle linguistic cues affect children's motivation. Psychological Science : A Journal of the American Psychological Society / APS, 18(4), 314-316. 
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. (2003). Safe and sound: An educational Leader's guide to evidence-based social and emotional learning (SEL) programs. Chicago, IL: Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. 
Fulk, B. J. M., & Mastropieri, M. A. (1990). Training positive attitudes:" I tried hard and did well!". Intervention in School and Clinic, 26(2), 79-83. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Cox, K. E. (2001). Classroom conditions for motivation and engagement in reading. 
Educational Psychology Review, 13(3), 283-302. 
Harter, S. (1990). Causes, correlates, and the functional role of self-worth: A life-span perspective. In R. J. Sternberg, & J. Kolligian (Eds.), Competence considered (pp. 67-97). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Marzano, R. J., Pickering, D. J., & Pollock, J. E. (2001). Classroom instruction that works: Researchedbased strategies for increasing student achievement. Virginia: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
McTighe, J., & O'Connor, K. (2005). Seven practices for effective learning. Educational Leadership, 63(3), 10-17. 
Onosko, J. J., & Jorgenson, C. M. (1998). Unit and lesson planning in the inclusive classroom: Maximizing learning opportunities for all students. In C. M. Jorgenson (Ed.), Restructuring high schools for all students: Taking inclusion to the next level (pp. 71-105). Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Vacca, R. T. (2006). They can because they think they can. Educational Leadership, 63(5), 56-59. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Self-efficacy: An essential motive to learn. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 82-91. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (2005). The hidden dimension of personal competence: Self regulated learning and practice. In A. J. Elliot & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 509-526). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
9.1: Promote expectations and beliefs that optimize motivation 
Learning can be affectively inaccessible when success requires students to set personally motivating goals and expectations, and where there are no options provided for students who differ in their ability to do so. Goal setting is an essential aspect of self-regulation; setting goals to avoid frustration, to modulate anxiety, and to set positive expectations are important skills to learn. Yet, these goals will vary greatly according to individual student needs - some students need to dampen anxiety to succeed while others may need to elevate it somewhat. The evidence listed here suggests the effectiveness of explicitly teaching and scaffolding goal-setting strategies and of empowering students to set their own goals. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective of the importance of guiding personal goal-setting and expectations. 
9.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Agran, M., Cavin, M., Wehmeyer, M., & Palmer, S. (2006). Participation of students with moderate to severe disabilities in the general curriculum: The effects of the self-determined learning model of instruction. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 31(3), 230-241. 
Aunola, K., Nurmi, J. E., Niemi, P., Lerkkanen, M. K., & Rasku-Puttonen, H. (2002). Developmental dynamics of achievement strategies, reading performance, and parental beliefs. Reading Research Quarterly, 37(3), 310-327. 
Bandura, A., & Cervone, D. (1983). Self-evaluative and self-efficacy mechanisms governing the motivational effects of goal systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(5), 1017-1028. 
Brewer, M. B., & Hewstone, M. (2004). Emotion and motivation. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
Butler, D. L. (1997). The roles of goal setting and self-monitoring in students' self-regulated engagement in tasks. Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, March 24-28, 1997). 
Catlin, K. S., Lewan, G. J., & Perignon, B. J. (1999). Increasing student engagement through goalsetting, cooperative learning & student choice. (Master's Action Research Project, Saint Xavier University and IRI/SkyLight). 
Cleary, T. J., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2004). Self-regulation empowerment program: A school-based program to enhance self-regulated and self-motivated cycles of student learning. Psychology in the Schools, 41(5), 537-550. 
Earley, P. C. (1985). Influence of information choice and task complexity upon goal acceptance, performance and personal goals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(3), 481-491. 
Elliott, E. S., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: An approach to motivation and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 5-12. 
Hannafin, M. J. (1981). Effects of teacher and student goal setting and evaluations on mathematics achievement and student attitudes. Journal of Educational Research, 74(5), 321-326. 
Hannula, M. S. (2006). Motivation in mathematics: Goals reflected in emotions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63(2), 165-178. 
Harackiewicz, J. M., Barron, K. E., Carter, S. M., Lehto, A. T., & Elliot, A. J. (1997). Predictors and consequences of achievement goals in the college classroom: Maintaining interest and making the grade. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(6), 1284-1295. 
Hole, J. L., & Crozier, W. R. (2007). Dispositional and situational learning goals and children's selfregulation. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(4), 773-786. 
Hom, H. L., & Arbuckle, B. (1988). Mood induction effects upon goal setting and performance in young children. Motivation and Emotion, 12(2), 113-122. 
Karabenick, S. A. (2004). Perceived achievement goal structure and college student help seeking. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 569-581. 
Law, Y. K. (2009). The role of attribution beliefs, motivation and strategy use in Chinese fifthgraders' reading comprehension. Educational Research, 51(1), 77-95. 
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (1993). The efficacy of psychological, educational, and behavioral treatment. Confirmation from meta-analysis. The American Psychologist, 48(12), 1181-1209. 
Locke, E. A. (1996). Motivation through conscious goal setting. Applied and Preventive Psychology, 5(2), 117-124. 
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task motivation. American Psychologist, 57(9), 705-717. 
Lodewyk, K. R., Winne, P. H., & Jamieson-Noel, D. L. (2009). Implications of task structure on selfregulated learning and achievement. Educational Psychology, 29(1), 1-25. 
Meece, J. L., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Hoyle, R. H. (1988). Students' goal orientations and cognitive engagement in classroom activities. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(4), 514-523. 
Newman, R. S., & Schwager, M. T. (1995). Students' help seeking during problem solving: Effects of grade, goal, and prior achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 32(2), 352-376. 
Pajares, F., Britner, S. L., & Valiante, G. (2000). Relation between achievement goals and selfbeliefs of middle school students in writing and science. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(4), 406-422. 
Palmer, S. B., & Wehmeyer, M. L. (2003). Promoting self-determination in early elementary school: Teaching self-regulated problem-solving and goal-setting skills. Remedial and Special Education, 24(2), 115-126. 
Paulsen, M. B., & Feldman, K. A. (2005). The conditional and interaction effects of epistemological beliefs on the self-regulated learning of college students: Motivational strategies. Research in Higher Education, 46(7), 731-768. 
Phillips, J. M., & Gully, S. M. (1997). Role of goal orientation, ability, need for achievement, and locus of control in the self-efficacy and goal-setting process. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(5), 792-802. 
Ridley, D. S. (1992). Self-regulated learning: The interactive influence of metacognitive awareness and goal-setting. Journal of Experimental Education, 60(4), 293-306. 
Roeser, R. W., Midgley, C., & Urdan, T. C. (1996). Perceptions of the school psychological environment and early adolescents' psychological and behavioral functioning in school: The mediating role of goals and belonging. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(3), 408-422. 
Schneider, W. (1998). Performance prediction in young children: Effects of skill, metacognition and wishful thinking. Developmental Science, 1(2), 291-297. 
Schunk, D. H. (1985). Participation in goal setting: Effects on self-efficacy and skills of learningdisabled children. Journal of Special Education, 19(3), 307-317. 
Schunk, D. H. (1996). Goal and self-evaluative influences during children's cognitive skill learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33(2), 359-382. 
Stipek, D. (1984). Young children's performance expectations: Logical analysis or wishful thinking? In J. Nicholls (Ed.), The development of achievement motivation, (pp. 33-56). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 
Stipek, D., & Gralinski, J. H. (1996). Children's beliefs about intelligence and school performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88(3), 397-407. 
Stipek, D. J., & Gralinski, J. H. (1991). Gender differences in children's achievement-related beliefs and emotional responses to success and failure in mathematics. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83(3), 361-371. 
Stipek, D. J., Roberts, T. A., & Sanborn, M. E. (1984). Preschool-age children's performance expectations for themselves and another child as a function of the incentive value of success and the salience of past performance. Child Development 55(6), 1983-1989. 
Wehmeyer, M. L., Yeager, D., Bolding, N., Agran, M., & Hughes, C. (2003). The effects of selfregulation strategies on goal attainment for students with developmental disabilities in general education classrooms. Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 15(1), 79-91. 
Wolters, C. A., Yu, S. L., & Pintrich, P. R. (1996). The relation between goal orientation and students' motivational beliefs and self-regulated learning. Learning and Individual Differences, 8(3), 211-238. 
Zimmerman, B. J., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Self-motivation for academic attainment: The role of self-efficacy beliefs and personal goal setting. American Educational Research Journal, 29(3), 663-676. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (1996). Self-regulated learning of a motoric skill: The role of goal setting and self-monitoring. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 8(1), 60-75. 
9.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Ames, C. (1992). Achievement goals and the classroom motivational climate. In D. H. Schunk, & J. L. Meece (Eds.), Student perceptions in the classroom. (pp. 327-348). Hillsdale, NJ, England: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Anderson, A. (1997). Learning strategies in physical education: Self-talk, imagery, and goal-setting. The Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 68(1), 30-35. 
Carroll, J., & Christenson, C. N. K. (1995). Teaching and learning about student goal setting in a fifth-grade classroom. Language Arts, 72(1), 42-49. 
Covington, M. V. (2000). Goal theory, motivation, and school achievement: An integrative review. Annual Reviews in Psychology, 51(1), 171-200. 
Hidi, S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2000). Motivating the academically unmotivated: A critical issue for the 21st century. Review of Educational Research, 70(2), 151-179. 
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting & task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1984). Goal setting: A motivational technique that works! Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice Hall. 
Madden, L. E. (1997). Motivating students to learn better through own goal-setting. Education, 117(3), 411-416. 
Maehr, M. L., & Midgley, C. (1991). Enhancing student motivation: A schoolwide approach. Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4), 399-427. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P.M. (2001). Goal setting and goal striving. In A. Tesser & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Intraindividual processes. Volume 1 of the Blackwell Handbook in Social Psychology. Editors-inchief: M. Hewstone & M. Brewer (pp. 329-347). Oxford: Blackwell. 
Rosenholtz, S. J., & Simpson, C. (1984). The formation of ability conceptions: Developmental trend or social construction? Review of Educational Research, 54(1), 31-63. 
Ryan, R. M., Connell, J. P., & Grolnick, W. S. (1992). When achievement is not intrinsically motivated: A theory of internalization and self-regulation in school. In K. Boggiano, & T. Pittman (Eds.), Achievement and motivation: A social development perspective (pp. 167-188). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Schunk, D. H. (1990). Goal setting and self-efficacy during self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 25(1), 71-86. 
Schunk, D. H. (2003). Self-efficacy for reading and writing: Influence of modeling, goal setting, and self-evaluation. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 159-172. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview. Educational Psychologist, 25(1), 3-17. 
9.2: Facilitate personal coping skills and strategies 
Learning can be affectively inaccessible when successful learning requires students to cope with negative emotions and frustrations and when there are no options for students who have difficulty in doing so. In order to develop effective self-regulatory skills, students must be exposed to varied strategies - reminders, models, checklists and so forth - that will help them to identify the coping mechanisms for managing the emotions that work best for them. The evidence listed below suggests the effectiveness of strategies such as developing help-seeking strategies, providing scaffolds and feedback for managing frustration, and building internal controls. The scholarly reviews and opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on the importance of scaffolding students' coping skills and strategies. 
9.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Agran, M., Blanchard, C., Wehmeyer, M., & Hughes, C. (2001). Teaching students to self-regulate their behavior: The differential effects of student-vs. teacher-delivered reinforcement. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 22(4), 319-332. 
Bong, M. (2008). Effects of parent-child relationships and classroom goal structures on motivation, help-seeking avoidance, and cheating. Journal of Experimental Education, 76(2), 191-217. 
Bouffard-Bouchard, T., Parent, S., & Larivee, S. (1991). Influence of self-efficacy on self-regulation and performance among junior and senior high-school age students. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 14(2), 153-164. 
Brewer, M. B., & Hewstone, M. (2004). Emotion and motivation. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
Brooks, A., Todd, A. W., Tofflemoyer, S., & Horner, R. H. (2003). Use of functional assessment and a self-management system to increase academic engagement and work completion. Journal of Positive Behavior, 53, 144-152. 
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2005). Engagement, disengagement, coping, and catastrophe. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 527-547). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Cleary, T. J., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2004). Self-regulation empowerment program: A school-based program to enhance self-regulated and self-motivated cycles of student learning. Psychology in the Schools, 41(5), 537-550. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1992). The initiation and regulation of intrinsically motivated learning and achievement. In A. K. Boggiano, & T. S. Pittman (Eds.), Achievement and motivation: A social developmental perspective (pp. 3-36). Toronto, ON: Cambridge University Press. 
El-Alayli, A., & Baumgardner, A. (2003). If at first you don't succeed, what makes you try,try again? Effects of implicit theories and ability feedback in a performance-oriented climate. Self & Identity, 2(2), 119-135. 
Evans, S. W., Pelham, W., & Grudberg, M. V. (1994). The efficacy of notetaking to improve behavior and comprehension of adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Exceptionality, 5(1), 1-17. 
Folkman, S., Lazarus, R. S., Dunkel-Schetter, C., DeLongis, A., & Gruen, R. J. (1986). Dynamics of a stressful encounter: Cognitive appraisal, coping, and encounter outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(5), 992-1003. 
Hannula, M. S. (2006). Motivation in mathematics: Goals reflected in emotions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63(2), 165-178. 
Hofer, B. K., Yu, S. L., & Pintrich, P. R. (1998). Teaching college students to be self-regulated learners. In D. H. Schunk, & B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.), Self-regulated learning from teaching to selfreflective practice (pp. 57-85). New York: Guilford. 
Hole, J. L., & Crozier, W. R. (2007). Dispositional and situational learning goals and children's selfregulation. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(4), 773-786. 
Karabenick, S. A. (2004). Perceived achievement goal structure and college student help seeking. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 569-581. 
Lancaster, P. E., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (2002). The development and validation of an interactive hypermedia program for teaching a self-advocacy strategy to students with disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 25(4), 277-302. 
Lee, J. K., & Lee, W. K. (2008). The relationship of e-Learner's self-regulatory efficacy and perception of e-learning environmental quality. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(1), 32-47. 
Lizarraga, M. L. S. d. A., Ugarte, M. D., Iriarte, M. D., & Baquedano, M. T. S. d. A. (2003). Immediate and long-term effects of a cognitive intervention on intelligent, self-regulations, and academic achievement. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 18(1), 59-75. 
Lodewyk, K. R., Winne, P. H., & Jamieson-Noel, D. L. (2009). Implications of task structure on selfregulated learning and achievement. Educational Psychology, 29(1), 1-25. 
Malmivuori, M. (2006). Affect and self-regulation. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63(2), 149164. 
Marchand, G., & Skinner, E. A. (2007). Motivational dynamics of children's academic help-seeking and concealment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(1), 65-82. 
Mercier, J., & Frederiksen, C. H. (2007). Individual differences in graduate students' help-seeking process in using a computer coach in problem-based learning. Learning & Instruction, 17(2), 184203. 
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodrigiez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244(4907), 933-938. 
Newman, R. S. (1998). Students' help seeking during problem solving: Influences of personal and contextual achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(4), 644-658. 
Newman, R. S., & Schwager, M. T. (1995). Students' help seeking during problem solving: Effects of grade, goal, and prior achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 32(2), 352-376. 
Paulsen, M. B., & Feldman, K. A. (2005). The conditional and interaction effects of epistemological beliefs on the self-regulated learning of college students: Motivational strategies. Research in Higher Education, 46(7), 731-768. 
Roll, I., Aleven, V., McLaren, B. M., & Koedinger, K. R. (2007). Designing for metacognition - applying cognitive tutor principles to the tutoring of help seeking. Metacognition and Learning, 2(2), 125-140. 
Ryan, A. M., Shim, S., & Patrick, H. (2005). Differential profiles of students identified by their teacher as having avoidant, appropriate, or dependent help-seeking tendencies in the classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 275-285. 
Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (1997). Developing self-efficacious readers and writers: The role of social and self-regulatory processes. In J. T. Guthrie, & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Reading engagement: Motivating readers through integrated instruction (pp. 34-50). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Shih, S. (2007). The role of motivational characteristics in Taiwanese sixth graders' avoidance of help seeking in the classroom. Elementary School Journal, 107(5), 473-495. 
Wood, H., & Wood, D. (1999). Help seeking, learning and contingent tutoring. Computers & Education, 33(2-3), 153-169. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of self-regulatory influences on writing course attainment. American Educational Research Journal, 31(4), 845-862. 
Zimmerman, B. J., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Self-motivation for academic attainment: The role of self-efficacy beliefs and personal goal setting. American Educational Research Journal, 29(3), 663-676. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1990). Student differences in self-regulated learning: Relating grade, sex, and giftedness to self-efficacy and strategy use. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(1), 51-59. 
9.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Aleven, V., Stahl, E., Schworm, S., Fischer, F., & Wallace, R. (2003). Help seeking and help design in interactive learning environments. Review of Educational Research, 73(3), 277-320. 
Banda, D. R., Matuszny, R. M., & Turkan, S. (2007). Video modeling strategies to enhance appropriate behaviors in children with autism. Teaching Exceptional Children, 39(6), 47-52. 
Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emotion, 7(2), 336-353. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Prentice, K., Burch, M., & Paulsen, K. (2002). Hot math: Promoting mathematical problem solving among third-grade students with disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 35(1), 70-73. 
Guthrie, J. T., & Cox, K. E. (2001). Classroom conditions for motivation and engagement in reading. Educational Psychology Review, 13(3), 283-302. 
Newman, R. S. (2002). How self-regulated learners cope with academic difficulty: The role of adaptive help seeking. Theory into Practice, 41(2), 132-138. 
Ryan, R. M., Connell, J. P., & Grolnick, W. S. (1992). When achievement is not intrinsically motivated: A theory of internalization and self-regulation in school. In K. Boggiano, & T. Pittman (Eds.), Achievement and motivation: A social development perspective (pp. 167-188). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Schunk, D. H. (2003). Self-efficacy for reading and writing: Influence of modeling, goal setting, and self-evaluation. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 159-172. 
Schunk, D. H. (2005). Commentary on self-regulation in school contexts. Learning & Instruction, 15(2), 173-177. 
Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2007). Influencing children's self-efficacy and self-regulation of reading and writing through modeling. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 23(1), 7-25. 
Seifert, T. L. (2004). Understanding student motivation. Educational Research, 46(2), 137-149. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview. 
Educational Psychologist, 25(1), 3-17. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (2005). The hidden dimension of personal competence: Self regulated learning and practice. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 509-526). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2008). Investigating self-regulation and motivation: Historical background, methodological developments, and future prospects. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 166-183. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Tsikalas, K. E. (2005). Can computer-based learning environments (CBLEs) be used as self-regulatory tools to enhance learning? Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 267-271. 
9.3: Develop self-assessment and reflection 
Learning can be affectively inaccessible when success requires that students monitor and reflect on their own emotional progress and when there are no options for individuals who have difficulty in doing so. Since there is great variability in students' capability for monitoring their emotions and reactivity; students will need varied amounts of explicit instruction and modeling, scaffolded practice with gradual release, and targeted feedback in order to make progress. Because of individual differences, multiple models and scaffolds of varied techniques should be offered so that students can identify, select and use the techniques that are personally optimal. The experimental evidence listed here suggests the effectiveness of, and the strategies for, developing students' self-questioning, self-monitoring, and self-determination skills. The scholarly reviews and opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on the importance of developing students' abilities for self-assessment and reflection. 
9.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Agran, M., Blanchard, C., Wehmeyer, M., & Hughes, C. (2002). Increasing the problem-solving skills of students with developmental disabilities participating in general education. Remedial and Special Education, 23(5), 279-288. 
Agran, M., Wehmeyer, M. L., Cavin, M., & Palmer, S. (2008). Promoting student active classroom participation skills through instruction to promote self-regulated learning and self-determination. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 31(2), 106-114. 
Blair, C., & Razza, R. P. (2007). Relating effortful control, executive function, and false belief understanding to emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten. Child Development, 78(2), 647-663. 
Brewer, M. B., & Hewstone, M. (2004). Emotion and motivation. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
Butler, D. L. (1997). The roles of goal setting and self-monitoring in students' self-regulated engagement in tasks. Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, March 24-28, 1997). 
de Bruin, A. B. H. (2007). Improving metacomprehension accuracy and self-regulation in cognitive skill acquisition: The effect of learner expertise. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 19(4/5), 671-688. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1992). The initiation and regulation of intrinsically motivated learning and achievement. In A. K. Boggiano, & T. S. Pittman (Eds.), Achievement and motivation: A social developmental perspective (pp. 3-36). Toronto, ON: Cambridge University Press. 
Duffy, G. G., Roehler, L. R., Sivan, E., Rackliffe, G., Book, C., Meloth, M., et al. (1987). Effects of explaining the reasoning associated with using reading strategies. Reading Research Quarterly, 22(3), 347-368. 
Fyrstén, S., Nurmi, J. E., & Lyytinen, H. (2006). The role of achievement beliefs and behaviours in spontaneous reading acquisition. Learning and Instruction, 16(6), 569-582. 
Lancaster, P. E., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (2002). The development and validation of an interactive hypermedia program for teaching a self-advocacy strategy to students with disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 25(4), 277-302. 
Nolan, T. E. (1991). Self-questioning and prediction: Combining metacognitive strategies. Journal of Reading, 35(2), 132-138. 
Ohtake, Y., & Wehmeyer, M. L. (2004). Applying the self-determination theory to Japanese special education contexts: A four-step model. Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities, 1(34), 169-178. 
Ridley, D. S. (1992). Self-regulated learning: The interactive influence of metacognitive awareness and goal-setting. Journal of Experimental Education, 60(4), 293-306. 
Sawyer, R. J. (1992). Direct teaching, strategy instruction, and strategy instruction with explicit self-regulation: Effects on the composition skills and self-efficacy of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(3), 340-352. 
Schunk, D. H. (1985). Participation in goal setting: Effects on self-efficacy and skills of learningdisabled children. Journal of Special Education, 19(3), 307-317. 
Schunk, D. H. (1996). Goal and self-evaluative influences during children's cognitive skill learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33(2), 359-382. 
Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (1997). Developing self-efficacious readers and writers: The role of social and self-regulatory processes. In J. T. Guthrie, & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Reading engagement: Motivating readers through integrated instruction (pp. 34-50). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Shogren, K. A., Wehmeyer, M. L., Buchanan, C. L., & Lopez, S. J. (2006). The application of positive psychology and self-determination to research in intellectual disability: A content analysis of 30 years of literature. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 31(4), 338-345. 
Shogren, K. A., Wehmeyer, M. L., Palmer, S. B., Soukup, J. H., Little, T. D., Garner, N., et al. (2008). Understanding the construct of self-determination: Examining the relationship between the Arc's Self-Determination Scale and the American Institutes for Research Self-Determination Scale. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 33(2), 94-107. 
Wehmeyer, M. L., & Palmer, S. B. (2003). Adult outcomes for students with cognitive disabilities three years after high school: The impact of self-determination. Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, 38(2), 131-144. 
Wehmeyer, M. L., Palmer, S. B., Soukup, J. H., Garner, N. W., & Lawrence, M. (2007). Selfdetermination and student transition planning knowledge and skills: Predicting involvement. Exceptionality, 15(1), 31-44. 
Wong, B. Y. L., & Jones, W. (1982). Increasing metacomprehension in learning disabled and normally achieving students through self-questioning training. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 5(3), 228-240. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (1996). Self-regulated learning of a motoric skill: The role of goal setting and self-monitoring. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 8(1), 60-75. 
9.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Anderson, A. (1997). Learning strategies in physical education: Self-talk, imagery, and goal-setting. The Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 68(1), 30-35. 
Banda, D. R., Matuszny, R. M., & Turkan, S. (2007). Video modeling strategies to enhance appropriate behaviors in children with autism. Teaching Exceptional Children, 39(6), 47-52. 
Carroll, J., & Christenson, C. N. K. (1995). Teaching and learning about student goal setting in a fifth-grade classroom. Language Arts, 72(1), 42-49. 
Clark, F. L., Deshler, D. D., Schumaker, J. B., Alley, G. R., & Warner, M. M. (1984). Visual imagery and self-questioning: Strategies to improve comprehension of written material. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17(3), 145-149. 
Lee, S., Palmer, S., Turnbull, A., & Wehmeyer, M. (2006). A model for parent-teacher collaboration to promote self-determination in young children with disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 38(3), 36-41. 
Montague, M. (2007). Self-regulation and mathematics instruction. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 22(1), 75-83. 
Palmer, S. B., Wehmeyer, M. L., Gipson, K., & Agran, M. (2004). Promoting access to the general curriculum by teaching self-determination skills. Exceptional Children, 70(4), 427-440. 
Price, L. A., Wolensky, D., & Mulligan, R. (2002). Self-determination in action in the classroom. Remedial and Special Education, 23(2), 109. 
Reid, R. (1996). Research in self-monitoring with students with learning disabilities: The present, the prospects, the pitfalls. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 317-331. 
Ryan, R. M., Connell, J. P., & Grolnick, W. S. (1992). When achievement is not intrinsically motivated: A theory of internalization and self-regulation in school. In K. Boggiano, & T. Pittman (Eds.), Achievement and motivation: A social development perspective (pp. 167-188). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Nolan, S. M., & Alley, G. R. (1994). The self-questioning strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Schunk, D. H. (2003). Self-efficacy for reading and writing: Influence of modeling, goal setting, and self-evaluation. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 159-172. 
Test, D. W., Mason, C., Hughes, C., Konrad, M., Neale, M., & Wood, W. M. (2004). Student involvement in individualized education program meetings. Exceptional Children, 70(4), 391-413. 
Watson, J. S. (1998). ''If you don't have it, you can't find it." A close look at students' perceptions of using technology. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(11), 1024-1036. 
Webre, E. C. (2005). Enhancing reading success with collaboratively created progress charts. Intervention in School and Clinic, 40(5), 291-295. 
Wehmeyer, M. (1997). Self-determination as an educational outcome: A definitional framework and implications for intervention. Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 9(3), 175-209. 
Wehmeyer, M., & Schwartz, M. (1997). Self-determination and positive adult outcomes: A followup study of youth with mental retardation or learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 63(2), 245255. 
Wehmeyer, M. L. (2007). Promoting self-determination in students with developmental disabilities. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Wehmeyer, M. L., Field, S., Doren, B., Jones, B., & Mason, C. (2004). Self-determination and student involvement in standards-based reform. Exceptional Children, 70(4), 413-426. 
Wehmeyer, M. L., & Palmer, S. B. (2000). Promoting the acquisition and development of selfdetermination in young children with disabilities. Early Education and Development, 11(4), 465-481. 
Representation Research 
1.1: Offer ways of customizing the display of information 
The experimental studies on providing options to customize the display of information are focused on the advantages of flexible typography, layout design, color representation, and large print. 
However, the experimental research on this topic, at least with learning as the outcome, is limited. There are few studies exploring the advantages of flexible size of text and images, of flexible amplitude of speech and sound, of contrast between background and text or image, of color, etc. due to the fact that the advantages of such flexibility are generally considered self-evident. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on the advantages of customizable display. Relevant Web Accessibility Guidelines are also included in this listing. 
1.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Eaton, S. B., Hamlett, C., Binkley, E., & Crouch, R. (2000). Using objective data sources to enhance teacher judgments about test accommodations. Exceptional Children, 67(1), 67-
81. 
Hughes, L., & Wilkins, A. (2000). Typography in children's reading schemes may be suboptimal: Evidence from measures of reading rate. Journal of Research in Reading, 23(3), 314-324. 
Hughes, L. E., & Wilkins, A. J. (2002). Reading at a distance: Implications for the design of text in children's big books. The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(2), 213-226. 
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2000). Incorporating learner experience into the design of multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(1), 126-136. 
Knowlton, M., & Woo, I. (1989). Functional color vision deficits and performance of children on an educational task. Education of the Visually Handicapped, 20(4), 156-162. 
Koenig, A. J. (1992). The relative effectiveness of reading in large print and with low vision devices for students with low vision. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 86(1), 48-53. 
Koenig, A. J., & Ross, D. (1991). A procedure to evaluate the relative effectiveness of reading in large and regular print. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 85(5), 198-204. 
Schwan, S., & Riempp, R. (2004). The cognitive benefits of interactive videos: Learning to tie nautical knots. Learning & Instruction, 14(3), 293-305. 
Sloan, L.L., & Habel, A. (1973). Reading speeds with textbooks in large and in standard print. The Sight-Saving Review, 43(2), 107-112. 
1.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Abell, M. M., Bauder, D. K., & Simmons, T. J. (2005). Access to the general curriculum: A curriculum and instruction perspective for educators. Intervention in School and Clinic, 41(2), 82-86. 
Banks, R., & Coombs, N. (2005). Accessible information technology and persons with visual impairments. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 379-391). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design, Inc. 
Bergman, O. (1999). Wait for me! Reader control of narration rate in talking books. Reading Online, Retrieved October 31, 2008, from www.Readingonline.org/articles/bergman/waitforme. 
Brinck, T. (2005). Return on goodwill: Return on investment for accessibility. In R. G. Bias, & D. J. Mayhew (Eds.), Cost-justifying usability (2nd ed., pp. 385-414). Boston, MA: Elsevier. 
Caldwell, B., Cooper, M., Guarino Reid, L. & Vanderheiden, G. Web accessibility guidelines 2.0: Guideline 1.3 Adaptable: Create content that can be presented in different ways (for example simpler layout) without losing information or structure. Retrieved October 31, 2008, from http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#content-structure-separation 
Caldwell, B., Cooper, M., Guarino Reid, L. & Vanderheiden, G. Web accessibility guidelines 2.0; guideline 1.1 Text alternatives: Provide text alternatives for any non-text content so that it can be changed into other forms people need, such as large print, braille, speech, symbols or simpler language. Retrieved October 31, 2008, from http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#text-equiv 
Colenbrander, A., Liegner, J. T., & Fletcher, D. C. (1999). Enhancing impaired vision. Ophthalmology Monographs, 12, 49-60. 
Griffin, H. C., Williams, S. C., Davis, M. L., & Engleman, M. (2002). Using technology to enhance cues for children with low vision. Teaching Exceptional Children, 35(2), 36-42. 
Hoffman, B., Hartley, K., & Boone, R. (2005). Reaching accessibility: Guidelines for creating and refining digital learning materials. Intervention in School & Clinic, 40(3), 171-177. 
Holzberg, C. S. (2004). Web site accessibility. Technology & Learning, 24(3), 48. 
Lang, M. (1993). Increasing access to information through use of color contrast. EnVision, 1, 1-2. 
Medlow, N. (1993). Lighting for children with impaired vision. EnVision, 1, 5. 
Simpson, R., Koester, H., & LoPresti, E. (2007). Selecting an appropriate scan rate: The ".65 rule". Assistive Technology: The Official Journal of RESNA, 19(2), 51-8; quiz 59-60. 
Stahl, S., & Aronica, M. (2002). Digital text in the classroom. Journal of Special Education Technology, 17(2), 57-59. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Text transformations. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
1.2: Offer alternatives for auditory information 
The experimental studies listed below are focused on the benefits for learning, of providing alternatives for information that is primarily presented auditorily. The majority of the experiments illustrate the advantages of captioning and bimodal presentation of information. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on the advantages of alternatives to auditory information. 
1.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Brunken, R., Plass, J. L., & Leutner, D. (2004). Assessment of cognitive load in multimedia learning with dual-task methodology: Auditory load and modality effects. Instructional Science, 32(1), 115132. 
Dalton, B., Schleper, D., Kennedy, M., Lutz, L., & Strangman, N. (2005). A universally designed digital strategic reading environment for adolescents who are deaf and hard of hearing. Final Report to Gallaudet University.Wakefield, MA: CAST. 
Easterbrooks, S. R., & Stoner, M. (2006). Using a visual tool to increase adjectives in the written language of students who are deaf or hard of hearing. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 27(2), 95-109. 
Furnham, A., De Siena, S., & Gunter, B. (2002). Children's and adults' recall of children's news stories in both print and audio-visual presentation modalities. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16(2), 191-210. 
Gentry, M. M., Chinn, K. M., & Moulton, R. D. (2005). Effectiveness of multimedia reading materials when used with children who are deaf. American Annals of the Deaf, 149(5), 394-403. 
Hayes, D. S., Kelley, S. B., & Mandel, M. (1986). Media differences in children's story synopses: Radio and television contrasted. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(5), 341-346. 
Jensema, C. J., Danturthi, R. S., & Burch, R. (2000). Time spent viewing captions in television programs. American Annals of the Deaf, 145(5), 464-468. 
Jensema, C. J., & El Sharkawy, S. (2000). Eye movement patterns of captioned television viewers. American Annals of the Deaf, 145(3), 275-285. 
John, D., & Boucouvalas, A. (2002). User performance with audio: The effect of subjects' cognitive styles. Educational Psychology, 22(2), 133-147. 
Linebarger, D. L. (2001). Learning to read from television: The effects of using captions and narration. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(2), 288-298. 
Montali, J., & Lewandowski, L. (1996). Bimodal reading: Benefits of a talking computer for average and less skilled readers. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 271-279. 
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2002). Verbal redundancy in multimedia learning: When reading helps listening. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(1), 156. 
Nugent, G. C. (1982). Pictures, audio, and print: Symbolic representation and effect on learning. Educational Communication and Technology: A Journal of Theory, Research, and Development, 30(3), 163-174. 
Nugent, G. C. (1983). Deaf students' learning from captioned instruction: The relationship between the visual and caption display. Journal of Special Education, 17(2), 227-234. 
Sinatra, G. (1990). Convergence of listening and reading processing. Reading Research Quarterly, 25(2), 115-130. 
Thorn, F., & Thorn, S. (1996). Television captions for hearing-impaired people: A study of key factors that affect reading. Human Factors, 38(3), 452. 
Tindall-Ford, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1997). When two sensory modes are better than one. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3(4), 257-287. 
Xiaowen, F., Shuang, X., Brzezinski, J., & Chan, S. S. (2006). A study of the feasibility and effectiveness of dual-modal information presentations. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 20(1), 3-17. 
1.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Brinck, T. (2005). Return on goodwill: Return on investment for accessibility. In R. G. Bias, & D. J. Mayhew (Eds.), Cost-justifying usability (2nd ed., pp. 385-414). Boston, MA: Elsevier. 
Easterbrooks, S. (1999). Improving practices for students with hearing impairments. Exceptional Children, 65(4), 537-554. 
Goldman, S. R. (2003). Learning in complex domains: When and why do multiple representations help? Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 239-244. 
Holzberg, C. S. (2004). Web site accessibility. Technology & Learning, 24(3), 48. 
Koskinen, P. S., & Wilson, R. M. (1993). Captioned video and vocabulary learning: An innovative practice in literary instruction. Reading Teacher, 47(1), 36-43. 
Marschark, M. (2006). Intellectual functioning of deaf adults and children: Answers and questions. 
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 18(1), 70-89. 
Rao, S. M., & Gagie, B. (2006). Learning through seeing and doing: Visual supports for children with autism.Teaching Exceptional Children, 38(6), 26-33. 
Scherer, M. J. (2005). Assistive technology in education for students who are hard of hearing or deaf. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 393-409). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design. 
Stahl, S., & Aronica, M. (2002). Digital text in the classroom. Journal of Special Education Technology, 17(2), 57-59. 
Vesel, J. (2005). Signing science! Andy and Tonya are just like me! They wear hearing aids and know my language!?. Learning and Leading with Technology, 32(8), 30-35. 
Zazove, P., Meador, H. E., Derry, H. A., Gorenflo, D. W., Burdick, S. W., & Saunders, E. W. (2004). Deaf persons and computer use. American Annals of the Deaf, 148(5), 376-384. 
1.3: Offer alternatives for visual information 
The experimental evidence supporting the provision of alternatives for visual information is the most extensive of all of the checkpoints under the guideline "Provide Options for Perception." Evidence that illustrates the benefits of text-to-speech, audio-visual presentations, and Braille are listed below. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on the advantages of alternatives for visual information. 
1.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Aarnoutse, C. A. J., van den Bos, K.P., & Brand-Gruwel, S. (1998). Effects of listening comprehension training on listening and reading. Journal of Special Education, 32(2), 115-116. 
Atkinson, R. K. (2002). Optimizing learning from examples using animated pedagogical agents. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 416-427. 
Boyle, E. A., Rosenberg, M. S., Connelly, V. J., Washburn, S. G., Brinckerhoff, L. C., & Banerjee, M. (2003). Effects of audio texts on the acquisition of secondary-level content by students with mild disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 26(3), 203-215. 
Brunken, R., Plass, J. L., & Leutner, D. (2004). Assessment of cognitive load in multimedia learning with dual-task methodology: Auditory load and modality effects. Instructional Science, 32(1), 115132. 
Carlisle, J. F., & Felbinger, L. (1991). Profiles of listening and reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Research, 84(6), 345-354. 
D'Angiulli, A., D'Angiulli, A., Kennedy, J. M., Helle, M. A., & Heller, M. A. (1998). Blind children recognizing tactile pictures respond like sighted children given guidance in exploration. 
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 39(3), 187-190. 
De Jong, M. T., & Bus, A. G. (2004). The efficacy of electronic books in fostering kindergarten children's emergent story understanding. Reading Research Quarterly, 39(4), 378-393. 
Dolan, R. P., Hall, T. E., Banerjee, M., Chun, E., & Strangman, N. (2005). Applying principles of universal design to test delivery: The effect of computer-based read aloud on test performance of high school students with learning disabilities. The Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 3(7). 
Ely, R., Emerson, R. W., Maggiore, T., Rothberg, M., O'Connell, T., & Hudson, L. (2006). Increased content knowledge of students with visual impairments as a result of extended descriptions. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(3), 31-43. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Eaton, S. B., Hamlett, C., Binkley, E., & Crouch, R. (2000). Using objective data sources to enhance teacher judgments about test accommodations. Exceptional Children, 67(1), 67-
81. 
Furnham, A., De Siena, S., & Gunter, B. (2002). Children's and adults' recall of children's news stories in both print and audio-visual presentation modalities. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16(2), 191-210. 
Gerlic, I., & Jausovec, N. (1999). Multimedia: Differences in cognitive processes observed with EEG. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(3), 5-14. 
John, D., & Boucouvalas, A. (2002). User performance with audio: The effect of subjects' cognitive styles. Educational Psychology, 22(2), 133-147. 
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2000). Incorporating learner experience into the design of multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(1), 126-136. 
Koroghlanian, C., & Klein, J. D. (2004). The effect of audio and animation in multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 13(1), 23-46. 
Leahy, W., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). When auditory presentations should and should not be a component of multimedia instruction. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17(4), 401-418. 
MacArthur, C. A., Ferretti, R. P., Okolo, C. M., & Cavalier, A. R. (2001). Technology applications for students with literacy problems: A critical review. The Elementary School Journal, 101(3), 273. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Haynes, J. B. (1995). Student assistant for learning from text (SALT): A hypermedia reading aid. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28(3), 150-159. 
Matthew, K. (1997). A comparison of the influence of interactive CD-ROM storybooks and traditional print storybooks on reading comprehension. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 29(3), 263-275. 
Mayer, R. E. (2003). The promise of multimedia learning: Using the same instructional design methods across different media. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 125-139. 
Montali, J., & Lewandowski, L. (1996). Bimodal reading: Benefits of a talking computer for average and less skilled readers. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 271-279. 
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Cognitive principles of multimedia learning: The role of modality and contiguity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(22), 358. 
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2002). Learning science in virtual reality multimedia environments: Role of methods and media. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(3), 598. 
Mousavi, S. L. Y., Low, R., & Sweller, J. (1995). Reducing cognitive load by mixing auditory and visual presentation modes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2), 319-334. 
Nugent, G. C. (1982). Pictures, audio, and print: Symbolic representation and effect on learning. Educational Communication and Technology: A Journal of Theory, Research, and Development, 30(3), 163-174. 
Oakley, G. (2003). Improving oral reading fluency (and comprehension) through the creation of talking books. Reading Online, 6(7), 1-26. 
Olson, R. K., & Wise, B. W. (1992). Reading on the computer with orthographic and speech feedback. Reading and Writing, 4(2), 107-144. 
Pezdek, K., & Hartman, E. F. (1983). Children's television viewing: Attention and comprehension of auditory versus visual information. Child Development, 54(4), 1015-1023. 
Piety, P. J. (2004). The language system of audio description: An investigation as a discursive process. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 98(8), 453-469. 
Reitsma, P. (1988). Reading practice for beginners: Effects of guided reading, reading-whilelistening, and independent reading with computer-based speech feedback. Reading Research Quarterly, 23(2), 219-235. 
Sinatra, G. (1990). Convergence of listening and reading processing. Reading Research Quarterly, 25(2), 115-130. 
Tabbers, H. K., Martens, R. L., & van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2004). Multimedia instructions and cognitive load theory: Effects of modality and cueing. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 74(1), 71-81. 
Tindall-Ford, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1997). When two sensory modes are better than one. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3(4), 257-287. 
Tinti, C., & Galanti, D. (1999). Interactive auditory and visual images in persons who are totally blind. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 93(9), 579-583. 
Torgesen, J. K. (1987). Using verbatim text recordings to enhance reading comprehension in learning disabled adolescents. Learning Disabilities Focus, 3(1), 30-38. 
Trushell, J., Maitland, A., & Burrell, C. (2003). Pupils' recall of an interactive storybook on CDROM: Inconsiderate interactive features and forgetting. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(1), 80-89. 
Wetzel, R., & Knowlton, M. (2000). A comparison of print and braille reading rates on three reading tasks. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 94(3), 146-154. 
Xiaowen, F., Shuang, X., Brzezinski, J., & Chan, S. S. (2006). A study of the feasibility and effectiveness of dual-modal information presentations. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 20(1), 3-17. 
1.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Aarnoutse, C., & Brand-Gruwel, S. (1997). Improving reading comprehension strategies through listening. Educational Studies, 23(2), 209-227. 
Balajthy, E. (2005). Text-to-speech software for helping struggling readers. Reading Online, 8(4), 1-
9. 
Banks, R., & Coombs, N. (2005). Accessible information technology and persons with visual impairments. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 379-391). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design, Inc. 
Brinck, T. (2005). Return on goodwill: Return on investment for accessibility. In R. G. Bias, & D. J. Mayhew (Eds.), Cost-justifying usability (2nd ed., pp. 385-414). Boston, MA: Elsevier. 
Brothers, R. J. (1971). Learning through listening: A review of the relevant factors. New Outlook for the Blind, 65(7), 224-231. 
Caldwell, B., Cooper, M., Guarino Reid, L. & Vanderheiden, G. Web accessibility guidelines 2.0; guideline 1.1 Text alternatives: Provide text alternatives for any non-text content so that it can be changed into other forms people need, such as large print, braille, speech, symbols or simpler language. Retrieved January 19, 2009, from http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#text-equiv 
Cook, A. M., & Polgar, J. M. (2008). Sensory aids for persons with visual impairments. In A. M. 
Cook, & J. M. Polgar (Eds.), Assistive technology principles and practices (3rd ed., pp. 274-309). St. Louis, MO: Mosby. 
Goldman, S. R. (2003). Learning in complex domains: When and why do multiple representations help? Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 239-244. 
Holzberg, C. S. (2004). Web site accessibility. Technology & Learning, 24(3), 48. 
Horney, M., & Anderson-Inman, L. (1999). Supported text in electronic reading environments. Reading & Writing Quarterly: Overcoming Learning Difficulties, 15(2), 127-168. 
Kurze, M. (1999). TGuide: A guidance system for tactile image exploration. Behaviour & Information Technology, 18(1), 11-17. 
McCall, S., & McLinden, M. (2001). Literacy and children who are blind and who have additional disabilities-the challenges for teachers and researchers. International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 48(4), 355-375. 
McKenna, M. C. (1997). Electronic texts and the transformation of beginning reading. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L. Labbo & R. D. Kieffer (Eds.), Literacy for the 21st century: Technological transformations in a post-typographical world (pp. 45-59). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Mckenna, M. C., Reinking, D., Labbo, L. D., & Kieffer, R. D. (1999). The electronic transformation of literacy and its implications for the struggling reader. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 15(2), 111126. 
McNear, D. (2004). Aligning braille literacy and assistive technology skills with ISTE educational technology standards. Closing the Gap, 23(5), 1-9. 
O'Connor, B. C., & O'Connor, M. K. (1999). Categories, photographs & predicaments: Exploratory research on representing pictures for access. Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 25(6), 17. 
Petty, L. (2005). Listening to the printed page: Features and options in optical character recognition and reading software. Closing the Gap, 24(1), 4-6. 
Pisha, B., & Coyne, P. (2001). Jumping off the page: Content area curriculum for the internet age. Reading Online, 5(4). 
Rose, D. H., & Dalton, B. (2002). Using technology to individualize reading instruction. In C. C. Block, L. B. Gambrell & M. Pressley (Eds.), Improving comprehension instruction: Rethinking research, theory, and classroom practice (pp. 257-274). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Snyder, J. (2005). Audio description: The visual made verbal. International Congress Series, 1282, 935-939. 
Stahl, S., & Aronica, M. (2002). Digital text in the classroom. Journal of Special Education Technology, 17(2), 57-59. 
Strangman, N., & Dalton, B. (2005). Using technology to support struggling readers: A review of the research. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), The handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp.545-569). Whitefish Bay, WI: Knowledge by Design. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Text transformations. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (2009). Effective Practices for Description of Science Content within Digital Talking Books. Retrieved February 16, 2009, from http://ncam.wgbh.org/publications/stemdx/index.html. 
Wittenstein, S.H, & Pardee, M.L. (1996). Teachers' voices: Comments on braille and literacy from the field. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 90(3), 201-209. 
2.1: Clarify vocabulary and symbols 
The use of vocabulary or symbols that are not familiar to the individual creates obstacles or barriers to comprehension and learning. The majority of the experimental studies listed here evaluate the effectiveness of the various tools and strategies designed to reduce those barriers and/or to build vocabulary knowledge. Other experimental studies focus on supporting students' understanding of the symbols that they encounter in their learning (e.g. interpreting graphs and maps, "reading" pictures and images, etc.). The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on supporting vocabulary development and symbol interpretation. Some of the articles in this list focus on the development of second language vocabulary acquisition. For a more complete list of references on second language learning, please be sure to explore the references for "Options that promote cross-linguistic understanding" as well. 
2.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A comparative study. Language, Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202-232. 
Boone, R., & Higgins, K. (1993). Hypermedia basal readers: Three years of school-based research. Journal of Special Education Technology, 12(2), 86-106. 
Bosseler, A., & Massaro, D. W. (2003). Development and evaluation of a computer-animated tutor for vocabulary and language learning in children with autism. Journal of Autism & Developmental Disorders, 33(6), 653-672. 
Chun, D. M. (2001). L2 reading on the web: Strategies for accessing information in hypermedia. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 367-403. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The Modern Language Journal, 80(2), 183-198. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24(4), 503-519. 
Dalton, B., & Strangman, N. (2006). Improving struggling readers' comprehension through scaffolded hypertexts and other computer-based literacy programs. In M. C. McKenna, L.D. Labbo, R.D. Kieffer and D. Reinking (Eds.), International handbook of literacy and technology volume II (pp. 75-92). Mahwah, NJ: Lawerence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
Dalton, B., Pisha, B., Eagleton, M., Coyne, P., & Deysher, S. (2002). Engaging the text: Final report to the U.S. Department of Education. Peabody: CAST. 
Guthrie, J. T., Weber, S., & Kimmerly, N. (1993). Searching documents: Cognitive processes and deficits in understanding graphs, tables, and illustrations. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 18(2), 186-221. 
Hebert, B. M., & Murdock, J. Y. (1994). Comparing three computer-aided instruction output modes to teach vocabulary words to students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 9(3), 136-141. 
Higgins, N. C., & Cocks, P. (1999). The effects of animation cues on vocabulary development. Reading Psychology, 20(1), 1-10. 
Jones, L. C., & Plass, J. L. (2002). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition in French with multimedia annotations. The Modern Language Journal, 86(4), 546-561. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Haynes, J. B. (1995). Student assistant for learning from text (SALT): A hypermedia reading aid. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28(3), 150-159. 
Mioduser, D., Tur-Kaspa, H., & Leitner, I. (2000). The learning value of computer-based instruction of early reading skills. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 16(1), 54-63. 
Nagy, W., & Scott, J. (2004). Vocabulary processes. In R. R. Ruddell, & N. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading (pp. 574-593). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Nagy, W. E. (1985). Learning words from context. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(2), 233-253. 
Nikolova, O. R. (2002). Effects of students' participation in authoring of multimedia materials on student acquisition of vocabulary. Language, Learning & Technology, 6(1), 100-122. 
Olson, R. K., & Wise, B. W. (1992). Reading on the computer with orthographic and speech feedback. Reading and Writing, 4(2), 107-144. 
Papalewis, R. (2004). Struggling middle school readers: Successful, accelerating intervention: Read 180 program. Reading Improvement, 41(1), 24-38. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (2003). Cognitive load in reading a foreign language text with multimedia aids and the influence of verbal and spatial abilities. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(2), 221-243. 
Proctor, C. P., Dalton, B., & Grisham, D. L. (2007). Scaffolding English language learners and struggling readers in a universal literacy environment with embedded strategy instruction and vocabulary support. Journal of Literacy Research, 39(1), 71-93. 
Rice, M. L. (1990). Words from" sesame street": Learning vocabulary while viewing. Developmental Psychology, 26(3), 421-428. 
Stewig, J. W. (1994). First graders talk about paintings. Journal of Educational Research, 87(5), 309316. 
Walsh, M. (2003). 'Reading' pictures: What do they reveal? Young children's reading of visual texts. Reading, 37(3), 123-130. 
Winn, W. D., & Sutherland, S. W. (1989). Factors influencing the recall of elements in maps and diagrams and the strategies used to encode them. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(1), 33-39. 
Xin, J. F., & Rieth, H. (2001). Video-assisted vocabulary instruction for elementary school students with learning disabilities. Information Technology in Childhood Education Annual, 1, 87-103. 
Yeung, A. S. (1999). Cognitive load and learner expertise: Split-attention and redundancy effects in reading comprehension tasks with vocabulary definitions. Journal of Experimental Education, 67(3), 197-217. 
2.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Blachowicz, C. L., & Fisher, P. J. (2007). Best practices in vocabulary instruction. In L. B. Gambrell, L. M. Morrow & M. Pressley (Eds.), Best practices in literacy instruction (pp. 178-203). New York: Guilford Publications, Inc. 
Caldwell, B., Cooper, M., Guarino Reid, L. & Vanderheiden, G. Web accessibility guidelines 2.0; guideline 3.1 Readable: Make text content readable and understandable. Retrieved May 26, 2009, from http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#meaning. 
Koskinen, P. S., & Wilson, R. M. (1993). Captioned video and vocabulary learning: An innovative practice in literary instruction. Reading Teacher, 47(1), 36-43. 
Pisha, B., & Coyne, P. (2001). Smart from the start: The promise of universal design for learning. 
Remedial and Special Education, 22(4), 197-203. 
Rose, D., & Dalton, B. (2002). Using technology to individualize reading instruction. In C. C. Block, L. B. Gambrell & M. Pressley (Eds.), Improving comprehension instruction: Rethinking research, theory, and classroom practice (pp. 257-274). San Francisco: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Strangman, N., & Dalton, B. (2005). Using technology to support struggling readers: A review of the research. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), The handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp.545-569). Whitefish Bay, WI: Knowledge by Design. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Text transformations. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
Verdi, M. P., & Kulhavy, R. W. (2002). Learning with maps and texts: An overview. Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 27-46. 
Werner, W. (2002). Reading visual texts. Theory & Research in Social Education, 30(3), 401-428. 
2.2: Clarify syntax and structure 
The particular structure in which information is presented creates its own processing demands or "cognitive load." The demands of the specific structure in which information is presented raises barriers that are much more problematic for some learners than others. The majority of the experimental studies on clarifying syntax and structure listed here focus upon the effectiveness of various tools and strategies to support students' understanding of syntactic and structural relationships. Many of the studies here come from a neural basis and examine how syntactical processing occurs in the brain. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroombased perspectives on supporting students' awareness of syntax and structure. 
2.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Behrns, I., Ahlsén, E., & Wengelin, Å. (2008). Aphasia and the process of revision in writing a text. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 22(2), 95-110. 
Bernolet, S., Hartsuiker, R. J., & Pickering, M. J. (2007). Shared syntactic representations in bilinguals: Evidence for the role of word-order repetition. Journal of Experimental Psychology / Learning, Memory & Cognition, 33(5), 931-949. 
Bornkessel, I., Zysset, S., Friederici, A. D., von Cramon, D. Y., & Schlesewsky, M. (2005). Who did what to whom? The neural basis of argument hierarchies during language comprehension. NeuroImage, 26(1), 221-233. 
Celinska, D. K. (2004). Personal narratives of students with and without learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 19(2), 83-98. 
Christensen, K. R. (2008). Interfaces, syntactic movement, and neural activation: A new perspective on the implementation of language in the brain. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 21(2), 73103. 
Cleary, A. M., & Langley, M. M. (2007). Retention of the structure underlying sentences. Language & Cognitive Processes, 22(4), 614-628. 
de Vries, M. H., Monaghan, P., Knecht, S., & Zwitserlood, P. (2008). Syntactic structure and artificial grammar learning: The learnability of embedded hierarchical structures. Cognition, 107(2), 763-774. 
Dimino, J. A., Taylor, R. M., & Gersten, R. M. (1995). Synthesis of the research on story grammar as a means to increase comprehension. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 11(1), 53-72. 
Dommes, P., Gersten, R., & Carnine, D. (1984). Instructional procedures for increasing skilldeficient fourth graders' comprehension of syntactic structures. Educational Psychology, 4(2), 155165. 
Ebbels, S. H., Van Der Lely, H. K. J., & Dockrell, J. E. (2007). Intervention for verb argument structure in children with persistent SLI: A randomized control trial. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 50(5), 1330-1349. 
Eigsti, I., Bennetto, L., & Dadlani, M. B. (2007). Beyond pragmatics: Morphosyntactic development in autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(6), 1007-1023. 
Friedmann, N., & Szterman, R. (2006). Syntactic movement in orally trained children with hearing impairment. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 11(1), 56-75. 
Friedmann, N., & Novogrodsky, R. (2007). Is the movement deficit in syntactic SLI related to traces or to thematic role transfer? Brain and Language, 101(1), 50-63. 
Frisson, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2007). The processing of familiar and novel senses of a word: Why reading Dickens is easy but reading Needham can be hard. Language & Cognitive Processes, 22(4), 595-613. 
Froud, K., & van der Lely, H. K. J. (2008). The count-mass distinction in typically developing and grammatically specifically language impaired children: New evidence on the role of syntax and semantics. Journal of Communication Disorders, 41(3), 274-303. 
Hewitt, L. E., Hinkle, A. S., & Miccio, A. W. (2005). Intervention to improve expressive grammar for adults with down syndrome. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 26(3), 144-155. 
Hofman, R., & van Oostendorp, H. (1999). Cognitive effects of a structural overview in a hypertext. British Journal of Educational Technology, 30(2), 129-140. 
Hooper, S. R., Wakely, M. B., de Kruif, R. E. L., & Swartz, C. W. (2006). Aptitude-Treatment interactions revisited: Effect of metacognitive intervention on subtypes of written expression in elementary school students. Developmental Neuropsychology, 29(1), 217-241. 
Kerkhofs, R., Vonk, W., Schriefers, H., & Chwilla, D. J. (2007). Discourse, syntax, and prosody: The brain reveals an immediate interaction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(9), 1421-1434. 
Kidd, E., Brandt, S., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Object relatives made easy: A crosslinguistic comparison of the constraints influencing young children's processing of relative clauses. Language & Cognitive Processes, 22(6), 860-897. 
Klin, C. M., Ralano, A. S., & Weingartner, K. M. (2007). Repeating phrases across unrelated narratives: Evidence of text repetition effects. Memory & Cognition, 35(7), 1588-1599. 
Law, J., Garrett, Z., & Nye, C. (2004). The efficacy of treatment for children with developmental speech and language delay/ disorder: A meta-analysis. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 47(4), 924-943. 
Lesaux, N. K., Rupp, A. A., & Siegel, L. S. (2007). Growth in reading skills of children from diverse linguistic backgrounds: Findings from a 5-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(4), 821-834. 
Lewis, B. A., Freebairn, L. A., & Taylor, H. G. (2000). Academic outcomes in children with histories of speech sound disorders. Journal of Communication Disorders, 33(1), 11-30. 
Lœvenbruck, H., Baciu, M., Segebarth, C., & Abry, C. (2005). The left inferior frontal gyms under focus: An fMRI study of the production of deixis via syntactic extraction and prosodic focus. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 18(3), 237-258. 
Marinis, T., & van der Lely, H. K. J. (2007). On-line processing of wh-questions in children with GSLI and typically developing children. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 42(5), 557-582. 
Markert, H., Knoblauch, A., & Palm, G. (2007). Modelling of syntactical processing in the cortex. Biosystems, 89(1-3), 300-315. 
McDuffie, A. S., Sindberg, H. A., Hesketh, L. J., & Chapman, R. S. (2007). Use of speaker intent and grammatical cues in fast-mapping by adolescents with down syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 50(6), 1546-1561. 
Mellow, J. D. (2008). The emergence of complex syntax: A longitudinal case study of the ESL development of dependency resolution. Lingua, 118(4), 499-521. 
Miles, S., Chapman, R., & Sindberg, H. (2006). Sampling context affects MLU in the language of adolescents with down syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 49(2), 325337. 
Milman, L. H., Dickey, M. W., & Thompson, C. K. (2008). A psychometric analysis of functional category production in English agrammatic narratives. Brain and Language, 105(1), 18-31. 
Murray, L. L., & Lenz, L. P. (2001). Productive syntax abilities in Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases. Brain and Cognition, 46(1-2), 213-219. 
Newman, R. M., & McGregor, K. K. (2006). Teachers and laypersons discern quality differences between narratives produced by children with or without SLI. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 49(5), 1022-1036. 
Parisse, C., & Maillart, C. (2007). Phonology and syntax in French children with SLI: A longitudinal study. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 21(11), 945-951. 
Parladori, D., & Menegus, T. (2005). Correlation between morphosyntactic level and I.Q. in down's syndrome.survey of a group comprising 96 subjects. Acta Phoniatrica Latina, 27(3), 477-486. 
Pearce, W. M., McCormack, P. F., & James, D. G. H. (2003). Exploring the boundaries of SLI: Findings from morphosyntactic and story grammar analyses. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 17(45), 325-334. 
Prat, C. S., Keller, T. A., & Just, M. A. (2007). Individual differences in sentence comprehension: A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of syntactic and lexical processing demands. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(12), 1950-1963. 
Price, J. R., Roberts, J. E., Hennon, E. A., Berni, M. C., Anderson, K. L., & Sideris, J. (2008). Syntactic complexity during conversation of boys with fragile X syndrome and down syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 51(1), 3-15. 
Pulvermüller, F., Shtyrov, Y., Hasting, A. S., & Carlyon, R. P. (2008). Syntax as a reflex: 
Neurophysiological evidence for early automaticity of grammatical processing. Brain & Language, 104(3), 244-253. 
Reed, V. A., MacMillan, V., & McLeod, S. (2001). Elucidating the effects of different definitions of "utterance" on selected syntactic measures of older children's language samples. Asia Pacific Journal of Speech, 6(1), 39-45. 
Rice, M. L., Taylor, C. L., & Zubrick, S. R. (2008). Language outcomes of 7-year-old children with or without a history of late language emergence at 24 months. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 51(2), 394-407. 
Rispens, J., & Been, P. (2007). Subject-verb agreement and phonological processing in developmental dyslexia and specific language impairment (SLI): A closer look. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 42(3), 293-305. 
Romeo, K. (2008). A web-based listening methodology for studying relative clause acquisition. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(1), 51-66. 
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental Psychology / General, 124(11), 43-61. 
Shah, P., & Hoeffner, J. (2002). Review of graph comprehension research: Implications for instruction. Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 47-69. 
Shah, P., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Graphs as aids to knowledge construction: Signaling techniques for guiding the process of graph comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(4), 690-702. 
Shulman, C., & Guberman, A. (2007). Acquisition of verb meaning through syntactic cues: A comparison of children with autism, children with specific language impairment (SLI) and children with typical language development (TLD). Journal of Child Language, 34(2), 411-423. 
Stemberger, J. P. (2007). Children's overtensing errors: Phonological and lexical effects on syntax. Journal of Memory & Language, 57(1), 49-64. 
Torkildsen, J. v. K., Syversen, G., Simonsen, H. G., Moen, I., & Lindgren, M. (2007). Brain responses to lexical-semantic priming in children at-risk for dyslexia. Brain & Language, 102(3), 243-261. 
Tyler, A. A., Lewis, K. E., & Haskill, A. (2002). Efficacy and cross-domain effects of a morphosyntax and a phonology intervention. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 33(1), 52-66. 
Valian, V., & Lyman, C. (2003). Young children's acquisition of WH-questions: The role of structured input. Journal of Child Language, 30(1), 117-143. 
Vasilyeva, M., Huttenlocher, J., & Waterfall, H. (2006). Effects of language intervention on syntactic skill levels in preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 42(1), 164-174. 
Vasilyeva, M., Waterfall, H., & Huttenlocher, J. (2008). Emergence of syntax: Commonalities and differences across children. Developmental Science, 11(1), 84-97. 
Vicente, S., Orrantia, J., & Verschaffel, L. (2007). Influence of situational and conceptual rewording on word problem solving. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(4), 829-848. 
Vigil, V. T., Eyer, J. A., & Hardee, W. P. (2005). Relevant responding in pragmatic language impairment: The role of language variation in the information-soliciting utterance. Child Language Teaching & Therapy, 21(1), 1-21. 
Yoshinaga-Itano, C., & Downey, D. M. (1996). Development of school-aged deaf, hard-of-hearing, and normally hearing students' written language. Volta Review, 98(1), 3-7. 
Zywica, J., & Gomez, K. (2008). Annotating to support learning in the content areas: Teaching and learning science. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 52(2), 155-165. 
2.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Abbeduto, L., Warren, S. F., & Conners, F. A. (2007). Language development in down syndrome: From the prelinguistic period to the acquisition of literacy. Mental Retardation & Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 13(3), 247-261. 
Armstrong, E. (2005). Language disorder: A functional linguistic perspective. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 19(3), 137-153. 
Cain, K. (2007). Syntactic awareness and reading ability: Is there any evidence for a special relationship? Applied Psycholinguistics, 28(4), 679-694. 
Hassett, D. D., & Schieble, M. B. (2007). Finding space and time for the visual in K-12 literacy instruction. English Journal, 97(1), 62-68. 
Semel, E., & Rosner, S. R. (2003). Understanding Williams Syndrome: Behavioral patterns and interventions. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
Tomalin, M. (2007). Reconsidering recursion in syntactic theory. Lingua, 117(10), 1784-1800. 
Tsimpli, I. M., & Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007). The interpretability hypothesis: Evidence from whinterrogatives in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 23(2), 215-242. 
2.3: Support decoding of text, mathematical notation, and symbols 
Language and numbers must be encoded in visual symbols in order to render them accessible through print. That raises a new demand - decoding the symbols - which is trivial for many students but raises significant barriers for some. The majority of the experimental studies listed here focus upon the effectiveness of providing automatic text-to-speech for students who have especial difficulty decoding text. Studies find that students' lack of fluency acts as a barrier to comprehension and that decoding support can provide students access to content. Research on automatic text-to-speech continues to grow, and we hope to expand this list as more studies become available. Furthermore, there is limited research on the effectiveness of providing support for decoding mathematical notation (Mathematical Markup Language, or "Math ML") as this is an emerging area. Again, we hope to add to this list as more research is completed. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on proving decoding support to students. The specifications defining MathML are also included in this listing. 
2.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Dalton, B., & Strangman, N. (2006). Improving struggling readers' comprehension through scaffolded hypertexts and other computer-based literacy programs. In M. C. McKenna, L.D. Labbo, R.D. Kieffer and D. Reinking (Ed.), International handbook of literacy and technology volume II (pp. 7592). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
Dalton, B., Pisha, B., Eagleton, M., Coyne, P., & Deysher, S. (2002). Engaging the text: Final report to the U.S. department of education. Peabody: CAST. 
Elbro, C., Rasmussen, I., & Spelling, B. (1996). Teaching reading to disabled readers with language disorders: A controlled evaluation of synthetic speech feedback. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 37(2), 140-155. 
Elkind, J., Black, M. S., & Murray, C. (1996). Computer-based compensation of adult reading disabilities. Annals of Dyslexia, 46(1), 159-186. 
Elkind, J., Cohen, K., & Murray, C. (1993). Using computer based readers to improve reading comprehension of students with dyslexia. Annals of Dyslexia, 43, 238-259. 
Hecker, L., Burns, L., Katz, L., Elkind, J., & Elkind, K. (2002). Benefits of assistive reading software for students with attention disorders. Annals of Dyslexia, 52(1), 243-272. 
Higgins, E. L., & Raskind, M. H. (1997). The compensatory effectiveness of optical character 
Recognition/Speech synthesis on reading comprehension of postsecondary students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 8(2), 75-87. 
Higgins, E. L., & Raskind, M. H. (2005). The compensatory effectiveness of the Quicktionary Reading Pen II on the reading comprehension of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Special Education Technology, 20(1), 29-38. 
Lonigan, C. J., Driscoll, K., Phillips, B. M., Cantor, B. G., Anthony, J. L., & Goldstein, H. (2003). A computer-assisted instruction phonological sensitivity program for preschool children at-risk for reading problems. Journal of Early Intervention, 25(4), 248-262. 
Mioduser, D., Tur-Kaspa, H., & Leitner, I. (2000). The learning value of computer-based instruction of early reading skills. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 16(1), 54-63. 
Montali, J., & Lewandowski, L. (1996). Bimodal reading: Benefits of a talking computer for average and less skilled readers. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 271-279. 
Mostow, J., Aist, G., Burkhead, P., Corbett, A., Cuneo, A., Eitelman, S., et al. (2003). Evaluation of an automated reading tutor that listens: Comparison to human tutoring and classroom instruction. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 29(1), 61-117. 
Papalewis, R. (2004). Struggling middle school readers: Successful, accelerating intervention: Read 180 program.Reading Improvement, 41(1), 24-38. 
Torgesen, J. K. (1987). Using verbatim text recordings to enhance reading comprehension in learning disabled adolescents. Learning Disabilities Focus, 3(1), 30-38. 
2.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Ausbrooks, R., et al. Mathematical markup language (MathML) Version 2.0 (second edition). 
Retrieved February 4, 2008 from http://www.w3.org/TR/2003/REC-MathML2-20031021/. 
Balajthy, E. (2005). Text-to-speech software for helping struggling readers. Reading Online, 8(4), 1-
9. 
Horney, M., & Anderson-Inman, L. (1999). Supported text in electronic reading environments. Reading & Writing Quarterly: Overcoming Learning Difficulties, 15(2), 127-168. 
McKenna, M. C. (1997). Electronic texts and the transformation of beginning reading. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L. Labbo & R. D. Kieffer (Eds.), Literacy for the 21st century: Technological transformations in a post-typographical world (pp. 45-59). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Mckenna, M. C., Reinking, D., Labbo, L. D., & Kieffer, R. D. (1999). The electronic transformation of literacy and its implications for the struggling reader. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 15(2), 111126. 
Pisha, B., & Coyne, P. (2001). Smart from the start: The promise of universal design for learning. Remedial and Special Education, 22(4), 197-203. 
Rose, D. H., & Dalton, B. (2002). Using technology to individualize reading instruction. In C. C. Block, L. B. Gambrell & M. Pressley (Eds.), Improving comprehension instruction: Rethinking research, theory, and classroom practice (pp. 257-274). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Strangman, N., & Dalton, B. (2005). Using technology to support struggling readers: A review of the research. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), The handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp.545-569). Whitefish Bay, WI: Knowledge by Design. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Text transformations. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
2.4: Promote understanding across languages 
While students come to school with many different language backgrounds, the language of instruction is typically only in English, raising barriers for many. The majority of the experimental studies on promoting cross-linguistic understanding listed here focus upon the effectiveness of various tools and strategies to support students' second language acquisition, usually English.These studies review a range of approaches such as incorporating multimedia support, embedding vocabulary support, establishing models of peer support, etc. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on supporting second language learning. Some of the articles in this list focus upon vocabulary support. For a more complete list of references on vocabulary development, please be sure to explore the references for "Options that define vocabulary and symbols" as well. 
2.4 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: 
A comparative study. Language, Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202-232. 
August, D., Carlo, M., Calderon, M., & Proctor, C. P. (2005). Development of literacy in Spanishspeaking English language learners: Findings from a longitudinal study of elementary school children. Perspectives, 31(2), 17-19. 
Baker, S. K., Gersten, R., Haager, D., & Dingle, M. (2006). Teaching practice and the reading growth of first-grade English learners: Validation of an observation instrument. The Elementary School Journal, 107(2), 199-220. 
Cardenas-Hagan, E., Carlson, C. D., & Pollard-Durodola, S. D. (2007). The cross-linguistic transfer of early literacy skills: The role of initial L1 and L2 skills and language of instruction. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 38(3), 249-259. 
Chun, D. M. (2001). L2 reading on the web: Strategies for accessing information in hypermedia. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 367-403. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24(4), 503-519. 
Duff, P. A. (2001). Language, literacy, content, and (pop) culture: Challenges for ESL students in mainstream courses. Canadian Modern Language Review/La Revue Canadienne Des Langues Vivantes, 58(1), 103-132. 
Fradd, S. H., Lee, O., Sutman, F. X., & Saxton, M. K. (2001) Promoting science literacy with English language learners through instructional materials development: A case study. Bilingual Research Journal, 25(4), 417-439. 
Garcia, G. E. (1991). Factors influencing the English reading test performance of Spanish-speaking Hispanic children. Reading Research Quarterly, 26(4), 371-392. 
Jiménez, R., García, G. E., & Pearson, P. D. (1996). The reading strategies of bilingual Latina/o students who are successful English readers: Opportunities and obstacles. Reading Research Quarterly, 31(1), 90-112. 
Jimenez, R. T., Garcia, G. E., & Pearson, P. D. (1995). Three children, two languages, and strategic reading: Case studies in Bilingual/Monolingual reading. American Educational Research Journal, 32(1), 67-97. 
Jones, L. C., & Plass, J. L. (2002). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition in French with multimedia annotations. The Modern Language Journal, 86(4), 546-561. 
Kidd, E., Brandt, S., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Object relatives made easy: A crosslinguistic comparison of the constraints influencing young children's processing of relative clauses. 
Language & Cognitive Processes, 22(6), 860-897. 
Kobayashi, M. (2003). The role of peer support in ESL students' accomplishment of oral academic tasks. Canadian Modern Language Review/La Revue Canadienne Des Langues Vivantes, 59(3), 337369. 
Lesaux, N. K., Rupp, A. A., & Siegel, L. S. (2007). Growth in reading skills of children from diverse linguistic backgrounds: Findings from a 5-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(4), 821-834. 
Mellow, J. D. (2008). The emergence of complex syntax: A longitudinal case study of the ESL development of dependency resolution. Lingua, 118(4), 499-521. 
Pappamihiel, N. E. (2001). Moving from the ESL classroom into the mainstream: An investigation of English language anxiety in Mexican girls. Bilingual Research Journal, 25(1/2), 31-38. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (2003). Cognitive load in reading a foreign language text with multimedia aids and the influence of verbal and spatial abilities. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(2), 221-243. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., Leutner, D., Petig, W., & Voge, W. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning preferences in a second-language multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 25-36. 
Proctor, C. P., Dalton, B., & Grisham, D. L. (2007). Scaffolding English language learners and struggling readers in a universal literacy environment with embedded strategy instruction and vocabulary support. Journal of Literacy Research, 39(1), 71-93. 
Proctor, C. P., August, D., Carlo, M., & Snow, C. (2005). Native Spanish-speaking children reading in English: Toward a model of comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 246-256. 
Proctor, C. P., August, D., Carlo, M. S., & Snow, C. E. (2006). The intriguing role of Spanish language vocabulary knowledge in predicting English reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 159-169. 
Riccio, C. A., Amado, A., Jimenez, S., Hasbrouck, J. E., Imhoff, B., & Denton, C. (2001). Crosslinguistic transfer of phonological processing: Development of a measure of phonological processing in Spanish. Bilingual Research Journal, 25(4), 583-604. 
Romeo, K. (2008). A web-based listening methodology for studying relative clause acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(1), 51-66. 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computerassisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 24(4), 491-501. 
Taylor, B. P. (1975). The use of overgeneralization and transfer learning strategies by elementary and intermediate students of ESL 1. Language Learning, 25(1), 73-107. 
Verhoeven, L. (2000). Components in early second language reading and spelling. Scientific Studies of Reading, 4(4), 313-330. 
2.4 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Busch, H. (2003). Computer based readers for intermediate foreign-language students. Educational Media International, 40(3), 276-285. 
Coelho, E. (1994). Learning together in the multicultural classroom. Markham, Ontario: Pippin Publishing Limited. 
Deignan, A., Gabrys, D., & Solska, A. (1997). Teaching English metaphors using cross-linguistic awareness-raising activities. ELT Journal, 51(4), 352-360. 
Durgunoğlu, A. Y. (2002). Cross-linguistic transfer in literacy development and implications for language learners. Annals of Dyslexia, 52(1), 189-204. 
Gersten, R. (1994). Effective instruction for culturally and linguistically diverse students: A reconceptualization. Focus on Exceptional Children, 27(1), 1-16. 
Gersten, R., & Baker, S. (2000). The professional knowledge base on instructional practices that support cognitive growth for english-language learners. In R. M. Gersten, E. P. Schiller & S. Vaughn 
(Eds.), Contemporary special education research: Syntheses of the knowledge base on critical instructional issues (pp. 31-79). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Gersten, R., & Woodward, J. (1994). The language minority student and special education: Issues, themes and paradoxes. Exceptional Children, 60(4), 310-322. (1994). 
Mayer, C., & Akamatsu, C. T. (2003). Bilingualism and literacy. In M. Marschark, & P. E. Spencer (Eds.), Oxford handbook of deaf studies, language, and education (pp. 136-147). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Odlin, T. (1989). Language transfer: Cross-linguistic influence in language learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Spangenberg-Urbschat, K., & Pritchard, R. H. (1994). Kids come in all languages: Reading instruction for ESL students. Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Strangman, N., Meyer, A., Hall, T., & Proctor, P. (2008). Improving foreign language instruction with new technologies and universal design for learning. In E. Hamilton, & T. & Barbieri (Eds.), Worlds apart: Disability and foreign language learning (pp. 33-48). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Tsimpli, I. M., & Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007). The interpretability hypothesis: Evidence from whinterrogatives in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 23(2), 215-242. 
Watts-Taffe, S., & Truscott, D. M. (2000). Using what we know about language and literacy development for ESL students in the mainstream classroom. Language Arts, 77(3), 258-265. 
2.5: Illustrate through multiple media 
In formal schooling, there is a marked tendency to present the majority of information in language, specifically in printed text. Many students for whom language is not a particular strength face persistent barriers not experienced by others. The experimental studies on the option of illustrating key concepts non-linguistically listed here span a range of media. There is extensive research to support the representation of information through a variety of formats: video, diagram, image, music, animation, and more. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on the importance of using a range of media to convey content to students. 
2.5 Experimental and Quantitative Evidence 
Anderson, D. R., Fite, K. V., Petrovich, N., & Hirsch, J. (2006). Cortical activation while watching video montage: An fMRI study. Media Psychology, 8(1), 7-24. 
Babbitt, B. C., & Miller, S. P. (1996). Using hypermedia to improve the mathematics problemsolving skills of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 391-401, 412. 
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R., Bruchmuller, K., & Hacker, S. (2005). Supporting learning with interactive multimedia through active integration of representations. Instructional Science, 33(1), 73-95. 
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R., Feuerlein, I., & Spada, H. (2004). The active integration of information during learning with dynamic and interactive visualisations. Learning & Instruction, 14(3), 325-341. 
Boone, R., & Higgins, K. (1993). Hypermedia basal readers: Three years of school-based research. Journal of Special Education Technology, 12(2), 86-106. 
Bottge, B. A., & Hasselbring, T. S. (1993). A comparison of two approaches for teaching complex, authentic mathematics problems to adolescents in remedial math classes. Exceptional Children, 59(6), 556-566. 
Butler, F. M., Miller, S. P., Crehan, K., Babbitt, B., & Pierce, T. (2003). Fraction instruction for students with mathematics disabilities: Comparing two teaching sequences. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 18(2), 99-111. 
Calvert, S. L., & Billingsley, R. L. (1998). Young children's recitation and comprehension of information presented by songs. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 19(1), 97-108. 
Carlson, R., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). Learning and understanding science instructional material. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(3), 629-640. 
Cennamo, K. S. (1993). Learning from video: Factors influencing learners' preconceptions and invested mental effort. Educational Technology, Research and Development, 41(3), 33-45. 
Center, Y., Freeman, L., Robertson, G., & Outhred, L. (1999). The effect of visual imagery training on the reading and listening comprehension of low listening comprehenders in year 2. Journal of Research in Reading, 22(3), 241-256. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24(4), 503-519. 
Doty, D. E., Popplewell, S. R., & Byers, G. O. (2001). Interactive CD-ROM storybooks and young readers' reading comprehension. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 33(4), 374-384. 
Dubois, M., & Vial, I. (2000). Multimedia design: The effects of relating multimodal information. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 16(2), 157-165. 
Filippatou, D., & Pumfrey, P. D. (1996). Pictures, titles, reading accuracy and reading comprehension: A research review (1973-95). Educational Research, 38(3), 259-291. 
Furnham, A., De Siena, S., & Gunter, B. (2002). "Children's and adults' recall of children's news stories in both print and audio-visual presentation modalities": Correction. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16(2), 191-210. 
Gambrell, L. B., & Jawitz, P. B. (1993). Mental imagery, text illustrations, and children's story comprehension and recall. Reading Research Quarterly, 28(3), 256-276. 
Gentry, M. M., Chinn, K. M., & Moulton, R. D. (2005). Effectiveness of multimedia reading materials when used with children who are deaf. American Annals of the Deaf, 149(5), 394-403. 
Gerlic, I., & Jausovec, N. (1999). Multimedia: Differences in cognitive processes observed with EEG. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(3), 5-14. 
Grace-Martin, M. (2001). How to design educational multimedia: A "loaded" question. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 10(4), 397-409. 
Hari Narayanan, N., & Hegarty, M. (2002). Multimedia design for communication of dynamic information. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57(4), 279-315. 
Hegarty, M., Narayanan, N. H., & Freitas, P. (2002). Understanding machines from multimedia and hypermedia presentations. In J. Otero, J. A. Leon & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), The psychology of science text comprehension. (pp.357-384). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Holmes, B. C. (1987). Children's inferences with print and pictures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(1), 14-18. 
Houts, P. S., Doak, C. C., Doak, L. G., & Loscalzo, M. J. (2006). The role of pictures in improving health communication: A review of research on attention, comprehension, recall, and adherence. Patient Education & Counseling, 61(2), 173-190. 
Innes Helsel, F. K., H., H. J., Miller, G., Malinow, A., & Murray, E. (2006). Identifying evidence-based, promising and emerging practices that use screen-based technology to teach mathematics in grades K-8: A research synthesis. CITEd Research Center. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=24&resource_id=302. 
Jones, L. C., & Plass, J. L. (2002). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition in French with multimedia annotations. The Modern Language Journal, 86(4), 546-561. 
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1999). Managing split-attention and redundancy in multimedia instruction. Applied cognitive psychology, 13(4), 351-371. 
Kamil, M., Intrator, S., & Kim, H. (2000). The effects of other technologies on literacy and literacy learning. In M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. Pearson & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 771-788). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Koroghlanian, C., & Klein, J. D. (2004). The effect of audio and animation in multimedia instruction. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 13(1), 23-46. 
Kozma, R. (2003). The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances for science understanding. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 205-226. 
Leahy, W., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). When auditory presentations should and should not be a component of multimedia instruction. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17(4), 401-418. 
Lee, Y., Park, S., Kim, M., Son, C., & Lee, M. (2005). The effects of visual illustrations on learners' achievement and interest in PDA (personal digital assistant) based learning. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 33(2), 137-791. 
Levie, W. H., & Lentz, R. (1982). Effects of text illustrations: A review of research. Educational Communication & Technology Journal, 30(4), 195-232. 
Lewalter, D. (2003). Cognitive strategies for learning from static and dynamic visuals. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 177-189. 
Lowe, R. (2004). Interrogation of a dynamic visualization during learning. Learning & Instruction, 14(3), 257-274. 
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: Selective processing of information in dynamic graphics. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 157-176. 
Matthew, K. (1997). A comparison of the influence of interactive CD-ROM storybooks and traditional print storybooks on reading comprehension. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 29(3), 263-275. 
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Mayer, R. E. (2002). Using illustrations to promote constructivist learning from science text. In J. 
Otero, J. Leon & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), The psychology of science text comprehension (pp. 333-356). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32(1), 1-19. 
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1992). The instructive animation: Helping students build connections between words and pictures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(4), 444-452. 
Mayer, R. E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive constraints on multimedia learning: When presenting more material results in less understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1), 187-198. 
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual-coding theory of multimedia. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86(3), 389-401. 
Mayer, R. E. (2003). The promise of multimedia learning: Using the same instructional design methods across different media. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 125-139. 
McClean, P., Johnson, C., Rogers, R., Daniels, L., Reber, J., Slator, B. M., et al. (2005). Molecular and cellular biology animations: Development and impact on student learning. Cell Biology Education, 4(2), 169-179. 
Paas, F., Van Gerven, P. W. M., & Wouters, P. (2007). Instructional efficiency of animation: Effects of interactivity through mental reconstruction of static frames. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21(6), 783-793. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (2003). Cognitive load in reading a foreign language text with multimedia aids and the influence of verbal and spatial abilities. Computers in Human Behavior, 19(2), 221-243. 
Reimer, K., & Moyer, P. S. (2005). Third-graders learn about fractions using virtual manipulatives: A classroom study. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 24(1), 5-25. 
Research Center, Center for Implementing Technology in Education (CITEd). K-8 screen-based technology to support mathematics. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=86. 
Research Center, Center for Implementing Technology in Education (CITEd). Multimedia technologies. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=141. 
Research Center, Center for Implementing Technology in Education (CITEd). Supporting students in mathematics through the use of manipulatives. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=13. 
Rice, M. L. (1990). Words from "Sesame Street": Learning vocabulary while viewing. Developmental Psychology, 26(3), 421-428. 
Rieber, L. P., Tzeng, S. C., & Tribble, K. (2004). Discovery learning, representation, and explanation within a computer-based simulation: Finding the right mix. Learning & Instruction, 14, 307-323. 
Schnotz, W., & Rasch, T. (2005). Enabling, facilitating, and inhibiting effects of animations in multimedia learning: Why reduction of cognitive load can have negative results on learning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(3), 47-58. 
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and interference in learning from multiple representation. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 141-156. 
Schwan, S., & Riempp, R. (2004). The cognitive benefits of interactive videos: Learning to tie nautical knots. Learning & Instruction, 14(3), 293-305. 
Shephard, K. (2003). Questioning, promoting and evaluating the use of streaming video to support student learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(3), 295-308. 
Trushell, J., Maitland, A., & Burrell, C. (2003). Pupils' recall of an interactive storybook on CDROM: Inconsiderate interactive features and forgetting. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(1), 80-89. 
Twyman, T., & Tindal, G. (2006). Using a computer-adapted, conceptually based history text to increase comprehension and problem-solving skills of students with disabilities. TAM Board Members, 21(2), 5-16. 
Walma Van Der Molen, J.H., & Van Der Voort, T. H. A. (2000). The impact of television, print, and audio on children's recall of the news. Human Communication Research, 26(1), 3-36. 
Weiss, I., Kramarski, B., & Talis, S. (2006). Effects of multimedia environments on kindergarten children's mathematical achievements and style of learning. Educational Media International, 43(1), 3-17. 
Winn, W., Berninger, V., Richards, T., Aylward, E., Stock, P., Lee, Y. L., et al. (2006). Effects of nonverbal problem solving treatment on skills for externalizing visual representation in upper elementary grade students with and without dyslexia. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34(4), 381-404. 
Xin, J. F., & Rieth, H. (2001). Video-assisted vocabulary instruction for elementary school students with learning disabilities. Information Technology in Childhood Education Annual, 1, 87-103. 
2.5 Scholarly reviews and expert opinions 
Ainsworth, S., & VanLabeke, N. (2004). Multiple forms of dynamic representation. Learning & Instruction, 14(3), 241-255. 
Alvermann, D. E., & Hagood, M. C. (2000). Critical media literacy: Research, theory, and practice in "New Times." Journal of Educational Research, 93(3), 193-205. 
Astleitner, H., & Wiesner, C. (2004). An integrated model of multimedia learning and motivation. Journal of Educational Multimedia & Hypermedia, 13(1), 3-21. 
Bean, T. W. (2000). ReWrite: A music strategy for exploring content area concepts. Reading Online. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/art_index.asp?HREF=bats/index.html. 
Bousted, M., & Ozturk, A. (2004). "It came alive outside my head." Developing literacies through comparison: The reading of classic text and moving image. Literacy, 38(1), 52-57. 
Carnahan, C. R. (2006). Photovoice: Engaging children with autism and their teachers. Teaching Exceptional Children, 39(2), 44-54. 
Carney, R. N., & Levin, J. R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations still improve students' learning from text. Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 5-26. 
Caspi, A., Gorsky, P., & Privman, M. (2005). Viewing comprehension: Students' learning preferences and strategies when studying from video. Instructional Science, 33(1), 31-47. 
Clark, R. C., & Lyons, C. (2004). Graphics for learning: Proven guidelines for planning, designing, and evaluating visuals in training materials. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Considine, D. M. (1986). Visual literacy & children's books: An integrated approach. School Library Journal, 33(1), 38-42. 
Dethier, B. (1991). Using music as a second language. English Journal, 80(8), 72-76. 
Edwards, C. P., & Willis, L. M. (2000). Integrating visual and verbal literacies in the early childhood classroom. Early Childhood Education Journal, 27(4), 259-265. 
Flannery, M. C. (2006). Thinking in pictures. American Biology Teacher, 68(5), 299-303. 
Goldman, S. R. (2003). Learning in complex domains: When and why do multiple representations help? Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 239-244. 
Gyselinck, V., & Tardieu, H. (1999). The role of illustrations in text comprehension: What, when, for whom, and why? The Construction of Mental Representations during Reading. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Heba, G. (1997). HyperRhetoric: Multimedia, literacy, and the future of composition. Computers and Composition, 14(1), 19-44. 
Hegarty, M. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning: Getting to the difficult questions. Learning & Instruction, 14, 343-351. 
Hibbing, A. N., & Rankin-Erickson, J. L. (2003). A picture is worth a thousand words: Using visual images to improve comprehension for middle school struggling readers. Reading Teacher, 56(8), 758-770. 
Kinzer, C. K., Gabella, M. S., & Rieth, H. J. (1994). An argument for using multimedia and anchored instruction to facilitate mildly disabled students' learning of literacy and social studies. Technology and Disability, 3(2), 117-128. 
Labbo, L. D., Eakle, A. J., & Montero, M. K. (2002). Digital language experience approach: Using digital photographs and software as a language experience approach innovation. Reading Online. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.readingonline.org/electronic/elec_index.asp?HREF=labbo2/index.... 
Lapp, D., Flood, J., & Fisher, D. (1999). Intermediality: How the use of multiple media enhances learning. Reading Teacher, 52(7), 776-780. 
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2002). Animation as an aid to multimedia learning. Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 87-99. 
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2002). Aids to computer-based multimedia learning. Learning & Instruction, 12(1), 107-119. 
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2003). Nine ways to reduce cognitive load in multimedia learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 43-52. 
Moore, D., & Taylor, J. (2000). Interactive multimedia systems for students with autism. Journal of Educational Media, 25(3), 169-177. 
Nathan, M., & Robinson, C. (2001). Considerations of learning and learning research: Revisiting the "media effects" debate. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 12(1), 69-88. 
Newkirk, T. (2006). Media and literacy: What's good? Educational Leadership, 64(1), 62-66. 
Pailliotet, A. W., Semali, L., Rodenberg, R. K., Giles, J. K., & Macaul, S. L. (2000). Intermediality: 
Bridge to critical media literacy. Reading Teacher, 54(2), 208-219. 
Park, I., & Hannafin, M. J. (1993). Empirically-based guidelines for the design of interactive multimedia. Educational Technology, Research and Development, 41(3), 63-85. 
Parsons, J., & Cole, L. (2005). What do the pictures mean? Guidelines for experimental evaluation of representation fidelity in diagrammatical conceptual modeling techniques. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 55(3), 327-342. 
Smith, J. L., & Herring, J. D. (1996). Literature alive: Connecting to story through the arts. Reading Horizons, 37(2), 102-115. 
Stevens, R., & Palacio-Cayetano, J. (2003). Design and performance frameworks for constructing problem-solving simulations. Cell Biology Education, 2(3), 162-179. 
Strangman, N., Hall, T. E., & Meyer, A. (2003). Virtual Reality/Simulations with UDL. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
Styles, M., & Arizpe, E. (2001). A gorilla with "grandpa's eyes": How children interpret visual texts-A case study of Anthony Browne's "Zoo". Children's Literature in Education, 32(4), 261-281. 
Williams, T. R. (1993). Text or graphic: An information processing perspective on choosing the more effective medium. Journal of Technical Writing and Communication, 23(1), 33-52. 
Wissick, C. A. (1996). Multimedia: Enhancing instruction for students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(5), 494-503. 
3.1: Activate or supply background knowledge 
Learning can be cognitively inaccessible when it requires specific background knowledge for assimilation, and where there are no options for individuals who differ in their access to that background knowledge. Those barriers can be reduced when options are available that supply or activate relevant prior knowledge, or link to the pre-requisite information elsewhere. The experimental and quantitative evidence listed here suggests the effectiveness of strategies such as anchored instruction, advanced organizers, analogies, and metaphors to activate students' background knowledge. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroombased perspective on many of the same strategies listed in the experimental evidence section. 
3.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Alvermann, D. E., Smith, L. C., & Readence, J. E. (1985). Prior knowledge activation and the comprehension of compatible and incompatible text. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(4), 420-436. 
Bottge, B. A., Rueda, E., Serlin, R. C., & Hung, Y. H. (2007). Shrinking achievement differences with anchored math problems: Challenges and possibilities. The Journal of Special Education, 41(1), 31-
49. 
Carr, S. C., & Thompson, B. (1996). The effects of prior knowledge and schema activation strategies on the inferential reading comprehension of children with and without learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 19(1), 48-61. 
Davis, S. J., & Winek, J. (1989). Improving expository writing by increasing background knowledge. Journal of Reading, 33(3), 178-181. 
Dochy, F., Segers, M., & Buehl, M. M. (1999). The relation between assessment practices and outcomes of studies: The case of research on prior knowledge. Review of Educational Research, 69(2), 145. 
Dole, J. A., Valencia, S. W., Greer, E. A., & Wardrop, J. L. (1991). Effects of two types of prereading instruction on the comprehension of narrative and expository text. Reading Research Quarterly, 26(2), 142-159. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Karns, K., Hamlett, C. L., Dutka, S., & Katzaroff, M. (2000). The importance of providing background information on the structure and scoring of performance assessments. Applied Measurement in Education, 13(1), 1-34. 
Gersten, R. (1998). Recent advances in instructional research for students with learning disabilities: An overview. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(3), 162-170. 
Langone, J., Malone, D. M., & Clinton, G. N. (1999). The effects of technology-enhanced anchored instruction on the knowledge of preservice special educators. Teacher Education and Special Education, 22(2), 85-96. 
Lott, G. W. (1983). The effect of inquiry teaching and advance organizers upon student outcomes in science education. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 20(5), 437-451. 
Luiten, J., Ames, W., & Ackerson, G. (1980). A meta-analysis of the effects of advance organizers on learning and retention. American Educational Research Journal, 17(2), 211-218. 
Rieth, H. J., Bryant, D. P., Kinzer, C. K., Colburn, L. K., Hur, S. J., & Hartman, P. (2003). An analysis of the impact of anchored instruction on teaching and learning activities in two ninth-grade language arts classes. Remedial and Special Education, 24(3), 173-184. 
Schwartz, N. H., Stroud, M., Hong, N. S., Lee, T., Scott, B., & McGee, S. M. (2006). Summoning prior knowledge: The influence of metaphorical priming on learning in a hypermedia environment. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35(1), 1-30. 
Serafino, K., & Cicchelli, T. (2003). Cognitive theories, prior knowledge, and anchored instruction on mathematical problem solving and transfer. Education and Urban Society, 36(1), 79-93. 
Seufert, T. (2003). Supporting coherence formation in learning from multiple representations. Learning & Instruction, 13(2), 227-237. 
Shin, E. C., Schallert, D. L., & Savenye, W. C. (1994). Effects of learner control, advisement, and prior knowledge on young students' learning in a hypertext environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 42(1), 33-46. 
Shyu, H. Y. (1997). Anchored instruction for Chinese students: Enhancing attitudes toward mathematics. International Journal of Instructional Media, 24(1), 55-62. 
Shyu, H. Y. (1999). Effects of media attributes in anchored instruction. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 21(2), 119-139. 
Spires, H. A., & Donley, J. (1998). Prior knowledge activation: Inducing engagement with informational texts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 249-260. 
Stone, C. L. (1983). A meta-analysis of advance organizer studies. Journal of Experimental Education, 51(7), 194-199. 
Woloshyn, V., Paivio, A., & Pressley, M. (1994). Use of elaborative interrogation to help students acquire information consistent with prior knowledge and information inconsistent with prior knowledge. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 79-89. 
3.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Bean, T. W. (1995). Strategies for enhancing text comprehension in middle school. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 11(2), 163-171. 
Bransford, J. D., Sherwood, R. D., Hasselbring, T. S., Kinzer, C. K., & Williams, S. M. (1990). Anchored instruction: Why we need it and how technology can help. In D. Nix & R. Sprio (Eds.), Cognition, education and multimedia (pp. 115-141). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1994). The concept anchoring routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1998). The concept mastery routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Burke, M. D., Hagan, S. L., & Grossen, B. (1998). What curricular designs and strategies accommodate diverse learners?. Teaching Exceptional Children, 31(2), 34-38. 
Carr, E., & Ogle, D. (1987). KWL plus: A strategy for comprehension and summarization. Journal of Reading, 30(7), 626-631. 
Deshler, D., Schumaker, J., Bulgren, J., Lenz, K., Jantzen, J., Adams, G., et al. (2001). Making learning easier: Connecting new knowledge to things students already know. Teaching Exceptional Children, 33(4), 82-85. 
Dochy, F. J. R. C., & Alexander, P. A. (1995). Mapping prior knowledge: A framework for discussion among researchers. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10(3), 225-242. 
Hall, T. E. (2002). Explicit instruction. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum.Retrieved on June 3, 2009, from www.cast.org/productsservices/resources/2002/ncac-explicit-instruction. 
Kameenui, E. J., & Carnine, D. W. (1998). Effective teaching strategies that accommodate diverse learners. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. 
Kinzer, C. K., Gabella, M. S., & Rieth, H. J. (1994). An argument for using multimedia and anchored instruction to facilitate mildly disabled students' learning of literacy and social studies. Technology and Disability, 3(2), 117-128. 
Marzano, R. J. (2004). Building background knowledge for academic achievement. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Pisha, B., & Coyne, P. (2001). Smart from the start: The promise of universal design for learning. Remedial and Special Education, 22(4), 197-203. 
Pressley, M., Johnson, C. J., Symons, S., McGoldrick, J. A., & Kurita, J. A. (1989). Strategies that improve children's memory and comprehension of text. The Elementary School Journal, 90(1), 3-32. 
Pressley, M., Yokoi, L., Rankin, J., Wharton-McDonald, R., & Mistretta, J. (1997). A survey of the instructional practices of grade 5 teachers nominated as effective in promoting literacy. Scientific Studies of Reading, 1(2), 145-160. 
Rose, D. H., & Dalton, B. (2002). Using technology to individualize reading instruction. In C. C. Block, L. B. Gambrell & M. Pressley (Eds.), Improving comprehension instruction: Rethinking research, theory, and classroom practice (pp. 257-274). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Zemitzsch, A., & Warner, M. W. (1993). The visual imagery strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2004). Background knowledge. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. Retrieved on June 3, 2009, from www.cast.org/productsservices/resources/2004/ncac-background-knowledge-udl. 
Strangman, N., Hall, T. E. & Meyer, A. (2004). Background knowledge Differentiated instruction and the implications for UDL implementation. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. Retrieved on June 3, 2009, from www.cast.org/productsservices/resources/2014/ncac-differentiated-instruction-udl. 
Tanner, K., & Allen, D. (2005). Approaches to biology teaching and learning: Understanding the wrong answers - teaching toward conceptual change. Cell Biology Education, 4(2), 112-117. 
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1990). Anchored instruction and its relationship to situated cognition. Educational Researcher, 19(6), 2-10. 
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1993). Anchored instruction and its relationship to situated cognition revisited. Educational Researcher, 33(3), 52-70. 
Xin, F. (1996). Multimedia reading: Using anchored instruction and video technology in vocabulary lessons. Teaching Exceptional Children, 29(2), 45-49. 
3.2: Highlight patterns, critical features, big ideas, and relationships 
Learning can be cognitively inaccessible when it requires the ability to select and prioritize among many elements or sources, and where there are no options for individuals who differ in that capability. One of the most effective ways to make information more accessible is to provide explicit cues or prompts that assist individuals in attending to those features that matter most while avoiding those that matter least. The experimental and quantitative evidence listed here reveals the effectiveness of strategies such as the use of graphic organizers, advanced organizers, multiple analogies and examples, and study guides to emphasize key ideas and relationships. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on the effectiveness of highlighting critical features, big ideas, and relationships. 
3.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bulgren, J. A., Deshler, D. D., Schumaker, J. B., & Lenz, B. K. (2000). The use and effectiveness of analogical instruction in diverse secondary content classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3), 426-441. 
Bulgren, J. A., Lenz, B. K., Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., & Marquis, J. G. (2002). The use and effectiveness of a comparison routine in diverse secondary content classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 356-371. 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1988). Effectiveness of a concept teaching routine in enhancing the performance of LD students in secondary-level mainstream classes. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 11(1), 3-17. 
Dyck, N., & Sunbye, N. (1988). The effects of text explicitness on story understanding and recall by learning disabled children. LD Research, 3(2), 68-77. 
Gardill, M. C., & Jitendra, A. K. (1999). Advanced story map instruction: Effects on the reading comprehension of students with learning disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 33(1), 2-17. 
Glick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12(3), 306355. 
Hamilton, S. L., Seibert, M. A., Gardner III, R., & Talbert-Johnson, C. (2000). Using guided notes to improve the academic achievement of incarcerated adolescents with learning and behavior problems. Remedial and Special Education, 21(3), 133-140. 
Horton, S. V., Lovitt, T. C., Givens, A., & Nelson, R. (1989). Teaching social studies to high school students with academic handicaps in a mainstreamed setting: Effects of a computerized study guide. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22(2), 102-107. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Haynes, J. B. (1995). Student assistant for learning from text (SALT): A hypermedia reading aid. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28(3), 150-159. 
Mayer, R. E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive constraints on multimedia learning: When presenting more material results in less understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1), 187-198. 
Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept maps and vee diagrams: Two metacognitive tools to facilitate meaningful learning. Instructional Science, 19(1), 29-52. 
Pollock, E., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2002). Assimilating complex information. Learning and Instruction, 12(1), 61-86. 
3.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1998). The concept mastery routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Bulgren, J. A., Lenz, K. B., Deshler, D. D., & Shumaker, J. B. (1995). The concept comparison routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Burke, M. D., Hagan, S. L., & Grossen, B. (1998). What curricular designs and strategies accommodate diverse learners? Teaching Exceptional Children, 31(2), 34-38. 
Ellis, E., Farmer, T., & Newman, J. (2005). Big ideas about teaching big ideas. Teaching Exceptional Children, 38(1), 34-40. 
Goldman, S. R. (1997). Learning from text: Reflections on the past and suggestions for the future. Discourse Processes, 23, 357-398. 
Grossen, B., Caros, J., Carnine, D., Davis, B., Deshler, D., Schumaker, J., et al. (2002). BIG ideas (plus a little effort) produce big results. Teaching Exceptional Children, 34(4), 70-73. 
Gyselinck, V., & Tardieu, H. (1999). The role of illustrations in text comprehension: What, when, for whom, and why. In H. Van Oostendorp & S. R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of mental representations during reading (pp.195-218). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Hall, T., & Vue, G. (2002). Explicit Instruction. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. (Updated 2014). Retrieved January 9, 2018 from https://www.cast.org/products-services/resources/2002/ncac-explicit-instruction. 
Kameenui, E. J., & Carnine, D. W. (1998). Effective teaching strategies that accommodate diverse learners. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. 
Lenz, K. B., Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., & Boudah, D. A. (1994). The unit organizer routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Lenz, K. B., Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., & Bulgren, J. A. (1998). The course organizer routine. Lawrence, Kansas: Edge Enterprises, Inc. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
3.3: Guide information processing and visualization 
Learning can be cognitively inaccessible when successful learning requires specific information processing strategies, and when there are no options for individuals who lack such strategies. When presented with new concepts, experienced learners use prior knowledge and experience to facilitate their information processing. However, many students lack the experience and the skills that guide them in their learning. These students benefit from explicit instruction and practice on the strategies involved in the selection and manipulation of information so that it can be better summarized, categorized, prioritized, contextualized and remembered. The experimental and quantitative research listed here suggests that strategies such as explicit prompts, graphic organizers, concept maps, strategy instruction, and chunking information into smaller elements all serve to increase student achievement. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on effectively guiding students' information processing. 
3.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Atkinson, R. K. (2002). Optimizing learning from examples using animated pedagogical agents. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 416-427. 
Blankenship, T. L., Ayres, K. M., & Langone, J. (2005). Effects of computer-based cognitive mapping on reading comprehension for students with emotional behavior disorders. Journal of Special Education Technology, 20(2), 15-23. 
Block, C. C. (1993). Strategy instruction in a literature-based reading program. The Elementary School Journal, 94(2), 139-151. 
Boon, R. T., Burke, M. D., Fore III, C., & Spencer, V. G. (2006). The impact of cognitive organizers and technology-based practices on student success in secondary social studies classrooms. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(1), 5-15. 
Bulgren, J., Deshler, D. D., & Lenz, B. K. (2007). Engaging adolescents with LD in higher order thinking about history concepts using integrated content enhancement routines. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 40(2), 121-133. 
Bulgren, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1988). Effectiveness of a concept teaching routine in enhancing the performance of LD students in secondary-level mainstream classes. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 11(1), 3-17. 
Carlson, R., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). Learning and understanding science instructional material. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(3), 629-640. 
Casteel, C. A. (1990). Effects of chunked text material on reading comprehension of high and low ability readers. Reading Improvement, 27(4), 269-275. 
Dalton, B., Morocco, C. C., Tivnan, T., & Rawson Mead, P. L. (1997). Supported-inquiry science: Teaching for conceptual change in the urban classroom. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 30(6), 670684. 
Dalton, B., Pisha, B., Eagleton, M., Coyne, P., & Deysher, S. (2002). Engaging the text: Final report to the U.S. department of education. Peabody: CAST. 
Dole, J. A., Brown, K. J., & Trathen, W. (1996). The effects of strategy instruction on the comprehension performance of at-risk students. Reading Research Quarterly, 31(1), 62-77. 
Englert, C., Raphael, L., Anderson, H., & Stevens, D. (1991). Making strategies and self talk visible: Writing instruction in regular and special education classrooms. American Educational Research Journal, 28(2), 337-372. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Finelli, R., Courey, S. J., Hamlett, C. L., Sones, E. M., et al. (2006). Teaching third graders about real-life mathematical problem solving: A randomized controlled study. The Elementary School Journal, 106(4), 293-311. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Prentice, K., Hamlett, C. L., Finelli, R., & Courey, S. J. (2004). Enhancing mathematical problem solving among third-grade students with schema-based instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(4), 635-647. 
Gajria, M., & Salvia, J. (1992). The effects of summarization instruction on text comprehension of students with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 58(6), 508-516. 
Gardill, M. C., & Jitendra, A. K. (1999). Advanced story map instruction: Effects on the reading comprehension of students with learning disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 33(1), 2-17. 
Hamilton, S. L., Seibert, M. A., Gardner III, R., & Talbert-Johnson, C. (2000). Using guided notes to improve the academic achievement of incarcerated adolescents with learning and behavior problems. Remedial and Special Education, 21(3), 133-140. 
Hannafin, R. D. (2004). Achievement differences in structured versus unstructured instructional geometry programs. Educational Technology Research and Development, 52(1), 19-32. 
Herl, H. E., O'Neil, H. F. J., Chung, G. K. W. K., & Schacter, J. (1999). Reliability and validity of a computer-based knowledge mapping system to measure content understanding. Computers in Human Behavior, 15(3-4), 315-333. 
Higgins, K., Boone, R., & Lovitt, T. (1996). Hypertext support for remedial students and students with disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 402-412. 
Hofman, R., & van Oostendorp, H. (1999). Cognitive effects of a structural overview in a hypertext. British Journal of Educational Technology, 30(2), 129-140. 
Horton, S. V., Lovitt, T. C., Givens, A., & Nelson, R. (1989). Teaching social studies to high school students with academic handicaps in a mainstreamed setting: Effects of a computerized study guide. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22(2), 102-107. 
Idol, L., & Croll, V. J. (1987). Story-mapping training as a means of improving reading comprehension. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 10(3), 214-229. 
Jacobson, M. J. (2008). A design framework for educational hypermedia systems: Theory, research, and learning emerging scientific perspectives. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56(1), 5-28. 
Lederer, J. M. (2000). Reciprocal teaching of social studies in inclusive elementary classrooms. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 33(1), 91-106. 
Lenz, B. K., Ehren, B. J., & Deshler, D. D. (2005). The content literacy continuum: A school reform framework for improving adolescent literacy for all students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 37(6), 60-63. 
Liu, M., & Bera, S. (2005). An analysis of cognitive tool use patterns in a hypermedia learning environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 5-21. 
Lodewyk, K. R., Winne, P. H., & Jamieson-Noel, D. L. (2009). Implications of task structure on selfregulated learning and achievement. Educational Psychology, 29(1), 1-25. 
Malone, L. D., & Mastropieri, M. A. (1992). Reading comprehension instruction: Summarization and self-monitoring training for students with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 58(3), 270279. 
Mason, L. H. (2004). Explicit self-regulated strategy development versus reciprocal questioning: Effects on expository reading comprehension among struggling readers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 283-296. 
McCormick, S. (1989). Effects of previews on more skilled and less skilled readers' comprehension of expository text. Journal of Reading Behavior, 21(13), 219-234. 
Moreno, R., Mayer, R. E., Spires, H. A., & Lester, J. C. (2001). The case for social agency in computer-based teaching: Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents?. Cognition and Instruction, 19(2), 177-213. 
Owen, R. L., & Fuchs, L. S. (2002). Mathematical problem-solving strategy instruction for thirdgrade students with learning disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 23(5), 268-278. 
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-monitoring activities. Cognition & Instruction, 1(1), 117-175. 
Paris, S. G., Wasik, B. A., & Turner, J. C. (1999). The development of strategic readers. In R. Barr, M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 609-640). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Pollock, E., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2002). Assimilating complex information. Learning and Instruction, 12(1), 61-86. 
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Hubscher, R. (2003). Improving navigation and learning in hypertext environments with navigable concept maps. Human-Computer Interaction, 18(4), 395428. 
Reinking, D. (1988). Computer-mediated text and comprehension differences: The role of reading time, reader preference, and estimation of learning. Reading Research Quarterly, 23(4), 484-498. 
Reinking, D., & Schreiner, R. (1985). The effects of computer mediated text on measures of reading comprehension and reading behavior. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(5), 536-552. 
Robinson, D. H., Katayama, A. D., Beth, A., Odom, S., Hsieh, Y. P., & Vanderveen, A. (2006). Increasing text comprehension and graphic note taking using a partial graphic organizer. The Journal of Educational Research, 100(2), 103-111. 
Robinson, D. H., Robinson, S. L., & Katayama, A. D. (1999). When words are represented in memory like pictures: Evidence for spatial encoding of study materials. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 24(1), 38-54. 
Rosenshine, B. (1997). Advances in research on instruction. In J. W. Lloyd, E. J. Kameenui & D. Chard (Eds.), Issues in educating students with disabilities (pp. 197-221). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Rosenshine, B., & & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 64(4), 479-530. 
Shin, E. C., Schallert, D. L., & Savenye, W. C. (1994). Effects of learner control, advisement, and prior knowledge on young students' learning in a hypertext environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 42(1), 33-46. 
Smolkin, L. B., & Donovan, C. A. (2001). The contexts of comprehension: The information book read aloud, comprehension acquisition, and comprehension instruction in a first-grade classroom. The Elementary School Journal, 102(2), 97-122. 
Swanson, H. L., & Deshler, D. (2003). Instructing adolescents with learning disabilities: Converting a meta-analysis to practice. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 36(2), 124-135. 
Van Meter, P. (2001). Drawing construction as a strategy for learning from text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1), 129-140. 
Vye, N. J. (1990). The effects of anchored instruction for teaching social studies: Enhancing comprehension of setting information. Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA. 
Zydney, J. M. (2008). Cognitive tools for scaffolding students defining an ill-structured problem. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 38(4), 353-385. 
3.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Baker, S., Gersten, R., & Scanlon, D. (2002). Procedural facilitators and cognitive strategies: Tools for unraveling the mysteries of comprehension and the writing process, and for providing meaningful access to the general curriculum. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(1), 65-77. 
Bockholt, S. M., West, J. P., & Bollenbacher, W. E. (2003). Cancer cell biology: A student-centered instructional module exploring the use of multimedia to enrich interactive, constructivist learning of science. Cell Biology Education, 2(1), 35-50. 
Cawley, J. F. (1994). Science for students with disabilities. Remedial and Special Education (RASE), 15(2), 67-71. 
Clark, F. L., Deshler, D. D., Schumaker, J. B., Alley, G. R., & Warner, M. M. (1984). Visual imagery and self-questioning: Strategies to improve comprehension of written material. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17(3), 145-149. 
Dalton, B., & Proctor, C. P. (2007). Reading as thinking: Integrating strategy instruction in a universally designed digital literacy environment. In D. S. McNamara (Ed.), Reading comprehension strategies: Theories, interventions, and technologies (pp. 421-439). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc Inc. 
Duffy, G. G. (2002). The case for direct explanation of strategies. In C. C. Block & M. Pressley (Eds.), Comprehension instruction (pp. 28-41). New York, NY: Guilford Publications, Inc. 
Dye, G. A. (2000). Graphic organizers to the rescue! helping students link - and remember - information. Teaching Exceptional Children, 32(3), 72-76. 
Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind: How children think and how school should teach. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Goldman, S. R. (1997). Learning from text: Reflections on the past and suggestions for the future. Discourse Processes, 23, 357-398. 
Hall, T. (2002). Explicit instruction. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum.Retrieved on June 12, 2009, from www.cast.org/publications/2002/ncac-explicitinstruction. 
Ives, B., & Hoy, C. (2003). Graphic organizers applied to higher-level secondary mathematics. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 18(1), 36-51. 
Jones, B. F. (1986). Quality and equality through cognitive instruction. Educational Leadership, 43(7), 4-11. 
Madigan, Hall, & Glang. (1997). Effective assessment and instructional practices for students with ABI. In A. Glang, G. H. S. Singer & B. Todis (Eds.), Students with acquired brain injury: The school's response (pp. 123-184). Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). What will I do to help students effectively interact with new knowledge? Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Nolet, V., & McLaughlin, M. J. (2005). Accessing the general curriculum: Including students with disabilities in standards-based reform. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc. 
Novak, J. D., & Cañas, A. J. (2006). The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct them. Pensacola, FL: Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Retrieved July 20, 2009, from http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/TheoryUnderlyingConceptM... 
Osborne, R., & Wittrock, M. (1985). The generative learning model and its implications for science education. Studies in Science Education, 12, 59-87. 
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1989). Classroom dialogues to promote self-regulated comprehension. In J. Brophy (Ed.), Teaching for meaningful understanding and self-regulated learning (pp. 35-71). Greenwich, CT: JAI. 
Pressley, M. (1990). Cognitive strategy instruction that really improves children's academic performance. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 
Pressley, M., Yokoi, L., Rankin, J., Wharton-McDonald, R., & Mistretta, J. (1997). A survey of the instructional practices of grade 5 teachers nominated as effective in promoting literacy. Scientific Studies of Reading, 1(2), 145-160. 
Ritchhart, R., & Perkins, D. N. (2005). Learning to think: The challenges of teaching thinking. In K. J. 
Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 775-802). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Roehler, L. R., Duffy, G. G., & Meloth, M. S. (1984). What to be direct about in direct instruction in reading: Content-only versus process-into-content. In T. E. Raphael (Ed.), The contexts of schoolbased literacy (pp. 79-95). New York, NY: Random House. 
Rose, D. H., & Dalton, B. (2002). Using technology to individualize reading instruction. In C. C. Block, L. B. Gambrell & M. Pressley (Eds.), Improving comprehension instruction: Rethinking research, theory, and classroom practice (pp. 257-274). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Rosenblatt, L. M. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem: The transactional theory of the literary work. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 3768. 
Schumaker, J. B., Denton, P. H., & Deshler, D. D. (1984). The paraphrasing strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Zemitzsch, A., & Warner, M. W. (1993). The visual imagery strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Seidel, R. J., Perencevich, K. C., & Kett, A. L. (2005). From principles of learning to strategies for instruction: Empirically based ingredients to guide instructional development. New York, NY: Springer. 
Singer, H., & Donlan, D. (1982). Problem-solving schema with question generation for comprehension of complex short stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 17(2), 166-186. 
Swanson, H. L. (2001). Searching for the best model for instructing students with learning disabilities. Focus on Exceptional Children, 34(2), 1-15. 
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design. Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251-296. 
Tarver, S. G. (1996). Direct instruction. In W. Stainback & S. Stainback (Eds.), Controversial issues confronting special education: Divergent perspectives (2nd ed., pp. 143-165). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Wiener, D. (2005). One state's story: Access and alignment to the GRADE-LEVEL content for students with significant cognitive disabilities. (Synthesis Report No. 57). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota, National Center on Educational Outcomes. 
3.4: Maximize transfer and generalization 
Learning can be cognitively inaccessible when success requires specific capacities in working or long-term memory, and where there are no options for students who differ in such memory capacities. Some students require explicit supports for memory and transfer in order to improve cognitive accessibility. Supports for memory and transfer include techniques that are designed to heighten the memorability of information as well as those that prompt and guide students to employ explicit mnemonic strategies. The experimental and quantitative research listed below supports the effectiveness of strategies such as strategic notetaking, visual imagery, and explicitly teaching for transfer in order to support students' memory and transfer. The scholarly reviews and expert options provide a more classroom-based perspective on strategies that will support memory and transfer. 
3.4 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Boyle, J. R., & Weishaar, M. (2001). The effects of strategic notetaking on the recall and comprehension of lecture information for high school students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 16(3), 133-141. 
Breznitz, Z. (1997). Effects of accelerated reading rate on memory for text among dyslexic readers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 289-297. 
Brownell, M. T., Mellard, D. F., & Deshler, D. D. (1993). Differences in the learning and transfer performance between students with learning disabilities and other low-achieving students on problem-solving tasks. Learning Disability Quarterly, 16, 138-156. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Finelli, R., Courey, S. J., & Hamlett, C. L. (2004). Expanding schema-based transfer instruction to help third graders solve real-life mathematical problems. American Educational Research Journal, 41(2), 419-445. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. L., & Appleton, A. C. (2002). Explicitly teaching for transfer: Effects on the mathematical problem-solving performance of students with mathematics disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(2), 90-106. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Phillips, N. B., Hamlett, C. L., & Karns, K. (1995). Acquisition and transfer effects of classwide peer-assisted learning strategies in mathematics for students with varying learning histories. School Psychology Review, 24(4), 604-620. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Prentice, K., Burch, M., Hamlett, C. L., Owen, R., et al. (2003). Explicitly teaching for transfer: Effects on third-grade students' mathematical problem solving. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 293-305. 
Ganske, L. (1981). Note-taking: A significant and integral part of learning environments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 29(3), 155-175. 
Garcia-Mila, M. (2007). Developmental change in notetaking during scientific inquiry. International Journal of Science Education, 29(8), 1035-1058. 
Hayes, D. S., Kelley, S. B., & Mandel, M. (1986). Media differences in children's story synopses: Radio and television contrasted. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(5), 341-346. 
Jacobson, M. J. (2008). A design framework for educational hypermedia systems: Theory, research, and learning emerging scientific perspectives. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56(1), 5-28. 
Pezdek, K. (1987). Memory for pictures: A life-span study of the role of visual detail. Child Development, 58(3), 807-815. 
Robinson, D. H., Robinson, S. L., & Katayama, A. D. (1999). When words are represented in memory like pictures: Evidence for spatial encoding of study materials. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 24(1), 38-54. 
Serafino, K., & Cicchelli, T. (2003). Cognitive theories, prior knowledge, and anchored instruction on mathematical problem solving and transfer. Education and Urban Society, 36(1), 79-93. 
Stern, E., Aprea, C., & Ebner, H. G. (2003). Improving cross-content transfer in text processing by means of active graphical representation. Learning & Instruction, 13(3), 191-203. 
Van Eck, R., & Dempsey, J. (2002). The effect of competition and contextualized advisement on the transfer of mathematics skills a computer-based instructional simulation game. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(3), 23-41. 
3.4 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Butterfield, E. C., & Nelson, G. D. (1989). Theory and practice of teaching for transfer. Educational Technology Research and Development, 37(3), 5-38. 
Edyburn, D. (2006). Cognitive prostheses for students with mild disabilities: Is this what assistive technology looks like. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(4), 62-65. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Prentice, K., Burch, M., & Paulsen, K. (2002). Hot math: Promoting mathematical problem solving among third-grade students with disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 35(1), 70-73. 
Hughes, C. A., & Suritsky, S. K. (1993). Notetaking skills and strategies for students with learning disabilities. Preventing School Failure, 38(1), 7-11. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
McKeough, A. (1995). Teaching for transfer: Fostering generalizations in learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Pea, R. D. (1988). Putting knowledge to use. In R. S. Nickerson & P. R. Zodhiates (Eds.), Technology in education: Looking toward 2020 (pp. 167-212). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (1998). Teaching for transfer. Educational Leadership, 46(1), 22-32. 
Pressley, M., Johnson, C. J., Symons, S., McGoldrick, J. A., & Kurita, J. A. (1989). Strategies that improve children's memory and comprehension of text. The Elementary School Journal, 90(1), 3-32. 
Ritchie, D., & Karge, B. D. (1996). Making information memorable: Enhanced knowledge retention and recall through the elaboration process. Preventing School Failure, 41(1), 28-33. 
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1989). Rocky roads to transfer: Rethinking mechanism of a neglected phenomenon. Educational Psychologist, 24(2), 113-142. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Zemitzsch, A., & Warner, M. W. (1993). The visual imagery strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Seidel, R. J., Perencevich, K. C., & Kett, A. L. (2005). From principles of learning to strategies for instruction: Empirically based ingredients to guide instructional development. New York, NY: Springer. 
Singer, H., & Donlan, D. (1982). Problem-solving schema with question generation for comprehension of complex short stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 17(2), 166-186. 
Action & Expression Research 
4.1: Vary the methods for response and navigation 
Most of the experimental studies on providing options in the mode of physical response are concentrated on the improvements to learning made possible by providing keyboarding and voice recognition options for several types of students: typically achieving students, students who have high incidence learning disabilities (e.g. dyslexia) or students who have specific writing disabilities (e.g. dysgraphia). In contrast, there are no experimental research studies that show evidence of improved learning for students with severe motor disabilities. This is remarkable since the advantages of physical and motor options (e.g. expanded keyboards, single switch devices, or other assistive technologies, etc.) for students with physical disabilities are typically considered the most enabling of options. These advantages are undoubtedly considered so self-evident that adequate experimental studies - on learning - have not been conducted. Scholarly reviews and opinion pieces are primarily limited to reports on comparative techniques and technical advances for mobility and dexterity rather than improvements in learning. 
4.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bangert-Drowns, R. L. (1993). The word processor as an instructional tool: A meta-analysis of word processing in writing instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63(1), 69-93. 
Crealock, C., & Sitko, M. (1990). Comparison between computer and handwriting technologies in writing training with learning disabled students. International Journal of Special Education, 5(2), 173-183. 
Dalton, D. W., & Hannafin, M. J. (1987). The effects of word processing on written composition. Journal of Educational Research, 80(6), 338-342. 
Dalton, B. D., Herbert, M., & Deysher, S. (2003). Scaffolding students' response to digital literature with embedded strategy supports: The role of audio-recording vs. writing student response options. 53rd Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference. 
Geoffrion, L. D. (1982). The feasibility of word processing for students with writing handicaps. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 11(3), 239-250. 
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A metaanalysis of studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1), 1-24. 
Hetzroni, O. E., & Shrieber, B. (2004). Word processing as an assistive technology tool for enhancing academic outcomes of students with writing disabilities in the general classroom. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37(2), 143. 
Higgins, E. L., & Raskind, M. H. (1995). Compensatory effectiveness of speech recognition on the written composition performance of postsecondary students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 18(2), 159-174. 
Jones, D., & Christensen, C. A. (1999). Relationship between automaticity in handwriting and students' ability to generate written text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(1), 44-49. 
Jones, I. (1994). The effect of a word processor on the written composition of second-grade pupils. Computers in the Schools, 11(2), 43-54. 
Joram, E. (1992). The effects of revising with a word processor on written composition. Research in the Teaching of English, 26(2), 167-193. 
Lange, A. A., McPhillips, M., Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2006). Assistive software tools for secondarylevel students with literacy difficulties. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(3), 13-22. 
Langone, J. (1996). The differential effects of a typing tutor and microcomputer-based word processing on the writing samples of elementary students with behavior disorders. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 29(2), 141-158. 
Lewis, R. B., Graves, A. W., Ashton, T. M., & Kieley, C. L. (1998). Word processing tools for students with learning disabilities: A comparison of strategies to increase text entry speed. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(2), 95-108. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1998). Word processing with speech synthesis and word prediction: Effects on the dialogue journal writing of students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 21(2), 151-166. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Graham, S. (1987). Learning disabled students' composing under three methods of text production: Handwriting, word processing, and dictation. Journal of Special Education, 21(3), 22-42. 
Owston, R. D. (1992). The effects of word processing on students. Research in the Teaching of English, 26(3), 249-276. 
Quinlan, T. (2004). Speech recognition technology and students with writing difficulties: Improving fluency. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 337-346. 
Roberts, K. D. (2005). The use of voice recognition software as a compensatory strategy for postsecondary education students receiving services under the category of learning disabled. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 22(1), 49-64. 
Rosenbluth, G. S., & Reed, W. M. (1992). The effects of writing-process-based instruction and word processing on remedial and accelerated 11th graders. Computers in Human Behavior, 8(1), 71-95. 
Stoner, J. B., Beck, A. R., Bock, S. J., Hickey, K., Kosuwan, K., & Thompson, J. R. (2006). The effectiveness of the picture exchange communication system with nonspeaking adults. Remedial & Special Education, 27(3), 154-165. 
Wetzel, K. (1996). Speech-recognizing computers: A written-communication tool for students with learning disabilities?. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 371-380. 
Wolfe, E. W., Bolton, S., Feltovich, B., & Niday, D. M. (1996). The influence of student experience with word processors on the quality of essays written for a direct writing assessment. Assessing Writing, 3(2), 123-147. 
4.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Access Board. (2001). Section 508: New federal standards. Closing the Gap, 20(1), 1-34. 
Balagopal, S., & Young, P. (Dec. 2001/Jan. 2002). Increasing independence in inclusive settings. Closing the Gap, 20(5), 1-16. 
Duerstock, B. S. (2006). Accessible microscopy workstation for students and scientists with mobility impairments. Assistive Technology : The Official Journal of RESNA, 18(1), 34-45. 
George, C. L., Schaff, J. L., & Jeffs, T. (2005). Physical access in today's schools: Empowerment through assistive technology. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 355-377). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design, Inc. 
Peterson-Karlan, G. R., Parette, H. P., & Center, S. E. A. T. (2007). Supporting struggling writers using technology: Evidence-based instruction and decision-making, National Center for Technology Innovation. 
Quenneville, J. (2001). Tech tools for students with learning disabilities: Infusion into inclusive classrooms. Preventing School Failure, 45(4), 167-170. 
Sanderson, A. (1999). Voice recognition software. A panacea for dyslexic learners or a frustrating hindrance? Dyslexia, 5, 114-118. 
Sitko, M. C., Laine, C. J., & Sitko, C. (2005). Writing tools: Technology and strategies for struggling writers. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 571-598). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design. 
Wadsworth, D., Donna, F., & Knight, D. (1999). Preparing the inclusion classroom for students with special physical and health needs. Intervention in School and Clinic, 34(3), 170. 
4.2: Optimize access to tools and assistive technologies 
The research evidence in this category is minimal and suffers, undoubtedly, from the same apparent "face validity" of the advantages in "response and navigation." For students with physical and motor disabilities, the advantages of providing alternative tools and assistive technologies are so evident that researchers have not adequately researched their actual advantages for learning. The available research is also widely scattered in terms of the types of options provided (e.g., switch options, overlays, alternative keyboards, etc.). Scholarly reviews are devoted most often to highlighting best practices and comparative techniques. 
4.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Alper, S., & Raharinirina, S. (2006). Assistive technology for individuals with disabilities: A review and synthesis of the literature. TAM Board Members, 21(2), 47-64. 
Lange, A. A., McPhillips, M., Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2006). Assistive software tools for secondarylevel students with literacy difficulties. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(3), 13-22. 
Mechling, L. C. (2006). Comparison of the effects of three approaches on the frequency of stimulus activations, via a single switch, by students with profound intellectual disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 40(2), 94. 
Norris, C., Sullivan, T., Poirot, J., & Soloway, E. (2003). No access, no use, no impact: Snapshot surveys of educational technology in K-12. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 36(1), 15-27. 
Stoner, J. B., Beck, A. R., Bock, S. J., Hickey, K., Kosuwan, K., & Thompson, J. R. (2006). The effectiveness of the picture exchange communication system with nonspeaking adults. Remedial & Special Education, 27(3), 154-165. 
4.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Behrmann, M., & Schaff, J. (2001). Assisting educators with assistive technology: Enabling children to achieve independence in living and learning. Children and Families, 42(3), 24-28. 
Brown, M. R. (2000). Access, instruction, and barriers: Technology issues facing students at risk. Remedial and Special Education, 21(3), 182-192. 
Caldwell, B., Cooper, M., Guarino Reid, L. & Vanderheiden, G. Web accessibility guidelines 2.0; guideline 4.1 compatible: Maximize compatibility with current and future user agents, including assistive technologies. Retrieved January 19, 2009, from http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#ensure-compat 
George, C. L., Schaff, J. L., & Jeffs, T. (2005). Physical access in today's schools: Empowerment through assistive technology. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 355-377). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design, Inc. 
Judge, S. (2006). Constructing an assistive technology toolkit for young children: Views from the field. Journal of Special Education Technology. 21(4), 17-24. 
Lee, C. M. (1999). Learning disabilities and assistive technology: An emerging way to touch the future. Amherst, MA: McGowan. 
Lewis, R. B. (1998). Assistive technology and learning disabilities: Today's realities and tomorrow's promises. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 31(1), 16-26, 54. 
Lodge, J. (2000). Will the overlay board survive in the mainstream primary classroom? Closing the Gap, 18(6), 16-17. 
Lueck, A. H., Dote-Kwan, J., Senge, J. C., & Clarke, L. (2001). Selecting assistive technology for greater independence. RE: View, 33(1), 21-33. 
Male, M. (2002). Technology for inclusion: Meeting the special needs of all students (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
McKenna, M. C., & Walpole, S. (2007). Assistive technology in the reading clinic: Its emerging potential. Reading Research Quarterly, 42(1), 140-145. 
Newton, D. A., Case, D. A., & Bauder, D. K. (2002). No- and low-tech tools to access the general curriculum. Closing the Gap, 21(4), 1-36. 
Peterson-Karlan, G. R., Parette, H. P., & Center, S. E. A. T. (2007). Supporting struggling writers using technology: Evidence-based instruction and decision-making, National Center for Technology Innovation. 
Raskind, M. H., & Higgins, E. L. (1998). Assistive technology for postsecondary students with learning disabilities: An overview. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 31(1), 27-40. 
Research Center, Center for Implementing Technology in Education (CITEd). Using assistive technologies to support writing. Retrieved January 19, 2009, from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=108 
Rose, D., Hasselbring, T. S., Stahl, S., & Zabala, J. (2005). Assistive technology and universal design for learning: Two sides of the same coin. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 507-518). Whitefish Bay, WI: Knowledge by Design. 
Thompson, T. (2003). The interdependent roles of all players in making technology accessible. Journal of Special Education Technology, 18(4), 21-28. 
Zabala, J., Blunt, M., Carl, D., Davis, S., Deterding, C., Foss, T., et al. (2000). Quality indicators for assistive technology services in school settings. Journal of Special Education Technology, 15(4), 25-
36. 
5.1: Use multiple media for communication 
Learning to communicate effectively through writing is one of the most demanding challenges for any student, but for some students learning to write raises special barriers or impediments. The experimental studies collected here provide evidence for the benefits of offering alternative media for expression for some or all students. The advantages of using a broader range of media - including word-processing, audio recording, video or film, multimedia, images, drawing, animation, graphics - are that building fluency with a wider range of options prepares all students better for the communication skills they will need in the 21st century and provides valuable alternatives for those students who have persistent difficulties in written expression. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide additional arguments for why it is important to expand the media available in our classrooms. 
5.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bangert-Drowns, R. L. (1993). The word processor as an instructional tool: A meta-analysis of word processing in writing instruction. Review of Educational Research, 63(1), 69-93. 
Daiute, C., & Morse, F. (1994). Access to knowledge and expression: Multimedia writing tools for students with diverse needs and strengths. Journal of Special Education Technology, 12(3), 221-256. 
Dalton, B., Tivnan, T., Riley, M. K., Rawson, P., & Dias, D. (1995). Revealing competence: Fourthgrade students with and without learning disabilities show what they know on paper-and-pencil and hands-on performance assessments. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 10(4), 197-214. 
Dalton, B. D., Herbert, M., & Deysher, S. (2003, December). Scaffolding students' response to digital literature with embedded strategy supports: The role of audio-recording vs. writing student response options. Paper presented at the 53rd Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference, Scottsdale, AZ. 
Dimitriadi, Y. (2001). Evaluating the use of multimedia authoring with dyslexic learners: A case study. British Journal of Educational Technology, 32(3), 265-275. 
Garthwait, A. (2004). Use of hypermedia in one middle school: A qualitative field study. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 13(3), 219-243. 
Gersten, R., & Baker, S. (2001). Teaching expressive writing to students with learning disabilities: A meta-analysis. The Elementary School Journal, 97(5), 475-500. 
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A metaanalysis of studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1), 1-24. 
Gouzouasis, P. (1994). Multimedia constructions of children: An exploratory study. Journal of Computing in Childhood Education, 5(3), 273-284. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Henry, A. (2002). Computer-graphics and the literary construct: A learning method. British Journal of Educational Technology, 33(1), 7-15. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Graham, S. (1987). Learning disabled students' composing under three methods of text production: Handwriting, word processing, and dictation. Journal of Special Education, 21(3), 22-42. 
Morocco, C. C., Dalton, B., & Tivnan, T. (1992). The impact of computer-supported writing instruction on fourth-grade students with and without learning disabilities. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 8(1), 87-113. 
Parker, D. (1999). You've read the book, now make the film: Moving image media, print literacy and narrative. English in Education, 33(1), 24-35. 
Reinking, D., & Watkins, J. (2000). A formative experiment investigating the use of multimedia book reviews to increase elementary students' independent reading. Reading Research Quarterly, 35(3), 389-419. 
Riddle, E.M. (1995). Communication through multimedia in an elementary classroom. East Lansing, MI: National Center for Research on Teacher Learning. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 384 346). Retrieved July 16, 2009, from ERIC database. 
van Essen, G., & Hamaker, C. (1990). Using self-generated drawings to solve arithmetic word problems. Journal of Educational Research, 83(6), 301-312. 
Vincent, J. (2001). The role of visually rich technology in facilitating children's writing. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 17(3), 242-250. 
Wilson, M. (1999). Student-generated multimedia presentations: Tools to help build and communicate mathematical understanding. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 18(2), 145-156. 
5.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Atlas, J. C. (2007). Lights, camera, reading. Reading Today, 24(4), 44-44. 
Church, W., Gravel, B., & Rogers, C. (2007). Teaching parabolic motion with stop-action animations. International Journal of Engineering Education, 23(5), 861-867. 
Davis, D. (2000). Eye Yummies: Computer graphics and alternative computer access. Closing the Gap, 19(4), 1-6-7, 44. 
Dillner, M. (2001). Using media flexibly to compose and communicate. Reading Online, 5(1). Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/art_index.asp?HREF=/articles/dilln.... 
Eagleton, M. (2002). Making text come to life on the computer: Toward an understanding of hypermedia literacy. Reading Online, 6(1). Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/art_index.asp?HREF=eagleton2/index.... 
Hibbing, A. N., & Rankin-Erickson, J. L. (2003). A picture is worth a thousand words: Using visual images to improve comprehension for middle school struggling readers. Reading Teacher, 56(8), 758. 
Ikan, P. A., & Conderman, G. (1996). Lights, camera, action!: A language arts activity for middle school students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 28(4), 69-71. 
Kendrick, M., & Mckay, R. (2004). Drawings as an alternative way of understanding young children's constructions of literacy. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 4(1), 109-128. 
Labbo, L. D. (2004). From writing workshop to multimedia workshop. Language Arts, 82(2), 119120. 
Morse, T. (2003). Enhancing special education students' multiple literacies through multimedia activities. Journal of Reading Education, 28(2), 39-40. 
Short, K. G., Kauffman, G., & Kahn, L. H. (2000). 'I just need to draw': Responding to literature across multiple sign systems. Reading Teacher, 54(2), 160-171. 
Strangman, N. (2002). Harriet Tubman and the Underground Railroad: Bringing a second-grade social studies curriculum online. Reading Online, 5(9). Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/voices/taverna_hongell/. 
Strangman, N. (2003). Literary and visual literacy for all: A fourth-grade study of Alice in Wonderland. Reading Online, 6(7). Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/voices/edinger/. 
Sumrell, J. (2005). Documenting children's learning thought multi-media projects. Closing the Gap, 24(4), 1-6. 
Wissick, C. A. (1996). Multimedia: Enhancing instruction for students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(5), 494-503. 
Yerrick, R. K., & Ross, D. L. (2001). I read, I learn, iMovie: Strategies for developing literacy in the context of inquiry-based science instruction. Reading Online, 5(1). Retrieved February 5, 2009, from www.readingonline.org/articles/art_index.asp?HREF=/articles/yerrick/inde.... 
5.2: Use multiple tools for construction and composition 
Many students have difficulties mastering the basic tools for communication and problem solving that are most commonly used in classrooms: pencils, pens, paintbrushes, chalk, rulers, and so forth. The difficulties are not limited to the physical use of these tools but to their skillful incorporation into communication and expression. The experimental studies included below examine the utility of providing the more flexible, and more contemporary, options that should be available in 21st century classrooms and workplaces: word processors that include spellcheckers and grammar checkers, calculators, word prediction programs, speech recognition software, etc. This research examines the utility of these options for students who struggle with fluent expression - e.g. language-based learning disabilities, executive function disorders - and for typically achieving students as well.The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces explore many of the same tools for expression as listed in the experimental studies; however, the scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on providing options in the tools available to students. 
5.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bridgeman, B., Harvey, A., & Braswell, J. (1995). Effects of calculator use on scores on a test of mathematical reasoning. Journal of Educational Measurement, 32(4), 323-340. 
Center for Implementing Technology in Education. K-12 calculator technology. Retrieved July 16, 2009, from http://www.cited.org/index.aspx?page_id=48. 
Crealock, C., & Sitko, M. (1990). Comparison between computer and handwriting technologies in writing training with learning disabled students. International Journal of Special Education, 5(2), 173-183. 
Dalton, D. W., & Hannafin, M. J. (1987). The effects of word processing on written composition. Journal of Educational Research, 80(6), 338-342. 
Dalton, B. D., Herbert, M., & Deysher, S. (2003, December). Scaffolding students' response to digital literature with embedded strategy supports: The role of audio-recording vs. writing student response options. Paper presented at the 53rd Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference, Scottsdale, AZ. 
Ellington, A. J. (2003). A meta-analysis of the effects of calculators on students' achievement and attitude levels in precollege mathematics classes. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 34(5), 433-463. 
Figueredo, L., & Varnhagen, C. K. (2006). Spelling and grammar checkers: Are they intrusive? British Journal of Educational Technology, 37(5), 721-732. 
Geoffrion, L. D. (1982). The feasibility of word processing for students with writing handicaps. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 11(3), 239-250. 
Gerlach, G. J. (1991). Using an electronic speller to correct misspelled words and verify correctly spelled words. Reading Improvement, 28(3), 188-194. 
Gersten, R., & Baker, S. (2001). Teaching expressive writing to students with learning disabilities: A meta-analysis. The Elementary School Journal, 97(5), 475-500. 
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A metaanalysis of studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1), 1-24. 
Graham, A. T., & Thomas, M. O. J. (2000). Building a versatile understanding of algebraic variables with a graphic calculator. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 41(3), 265-282. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Graham, T., & Smith, P. (2004). An investigation into the use of graphics calculators with pupils in key stage 2.International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 35(2), 227237. 
Gupta, R. (1998). Can spelling checkers help the novice writer? British Journal of Educational Technology, 29(3), 255-266. 
Hembree, R., & Dessart, D. J. (1986). Effects of hand-held calculators in precollege mathematics education: A meta-analysis. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 17(2), 83-99. 
Hetzroni, O. E., & Shrieber, B. (2004). Word processing as an assistive technology tool for enhancing academic outcomes of students with writing disabilities in the general classroom. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37(2), 143-154. 
Higgins, E. L., & Raskind, M. H. (1995). Compensatory effectiveness of speech recognition on the written composition performance of postsecondary students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 18(2), 159-174. 
Innes Helsel, F.K., Hitchcock, J.H., Miller, G., Malinow, A., Murray, E., & the Center for Implementing Technology in Education. (2006, April). Identifying evidence-based, promising and emerging practices that use screen-based and calculator technology to teach mathematics in grades K12: A research synthesis. Paper presented for the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA. Retrieved July 16, 2009, from http://www.cited.org/library/resourcedocs/AERA_CITEd_ed_Formatted_Update.... 
Jones, I. (1994). The effect of a word processor on the written composition of second-grade pupils. Computers in the Schools, 11(2), 43-54. 
Joram, E. (1992). The effects of revising with a word processor on written composition. Research in the Teaching of English, 26(2), 167-193. 
Kurth, R. J. (1987). Using word processing to enhance revision strategies during student writing activities. Educational Technology, 27(1), 13-19. 
Lange, A. A., McPhillips, M., Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2006). Assistive software tools for secondarylevel students with literacy difficulties. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(3), 13-22. 
Langone, J. (1996). The differential effects of a typing tutor and microcomputer-based word processing on the writing samples of elementary students with behavior disorders. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 29(2), 141-158. 
Lewis, R. B., Ashton, T. M., Haapa, B., Kieley, C. L., & Fielden, C. (1999). Improving the writing skills of students with learning disabilities: Are word processors with spelling and grammar checkers useful? Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 9(3), 87-98. 
Lewis, R. B., Graves, A. W., Ashton, T. M., & Kieley, C. L. (1998). Word processing tools for students with learning disabilities: A comparison of strategies to increase text entry speed. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(2), 95-108. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1996). Spelling checkers and students with learning disabilities: Performance comparisons and impact on spelling. Journal of Special Education, 30(1), 35-57. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1998). Word processing with speech synthesis and word prediction: Effects on the dialogue journal writing of students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 21(2), 151-166. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1999). Word prediction for students with severe spelling problems. Learning Disability Quarterly, 22(3), 158-172. 
MacArthur, C. A., Ferretti, R. P., Okolo, C. M., & Cavalier, A. R. (2001). Technology applications for students with literacy problems: A critical review. The Elementary School Journal, 101(3), 273-301. 
McNamara, D. S. (1995). Effects of prior knowledge on the generation advantage: Calculators versus calculation to learn simple multiplication. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2), 307-318. 
McNaughton, D. (1997). Proofreading for students with learning disabilities: Integrating computer and strategy use. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 12(1), 16-28. 
Morocco, C. C., Dalton, B., & Tivnan, T. (1992). The impact of computer-supported writing instruction on fourth-grade students with and without learning disabilities. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 8(1), 87-113. 
Murray, B., Silver-Pacuilla, H., Innes Helsel, F., & the Center for Implementing Technology in Education. (2007). Improving basic mathematics instruction: Promising technology resources for students with special needs.Technology in Action, 2(5). Retrieved July 16, 2009, from http://www.cited.org/library/site/039%20TAM-TIA-Feb-07-21.pdf. 
Orton-Flynn, S., & Richards, C. C. J. (2000). The design and evaluation of an interactive calculator for children. Digital Creativity, 11(4), 205-217. 
Owston, R. D. (1992). The effects of word processing on students. Research in the Teaching of English, 26(3), 249-276. 
Quesada, A. R., & Maxwell, M. E. (1994). The effects of using graphing calculators to enhance college students' performance in precalculus. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 27(2), 205-215. 
Quinlan, T. (2004). Speech recognition technology and students with writing difficulties: Improving fluency. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 337-346. 
Raskind, M. H., & Higgins, E. (1995). Effects of speech synthesis on the proofreading efficiency of postsecondary students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 18(2), 141-158. 
Roberts, D. M. (1980). The impact of electronic calculators on educational performance. Review of Educational Research, 50(1), 71-98. 
Roberts, K. D. (2005). The use of voice recognition software as a compensatory strategy for postsecondary education students receiving services under the category of learning disabled. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 22(1), 49-64. 
Rosenbluth, G. S., & Reed, W. M. (1992). The effects of writing-process-based instruction and word processing on remedial and accelerated 11th graders. Computers in Human Behavior, 8(1), 71-95. 
Tumlin, J., & Heller, K. W. (2004). Using word prediction software to increase typing fluency with students with physical disabilities. Journal of Special Education Technology, 19(3), 5-14. 
Wetzel, K. (1996). Speech-recognizing computers: A written-communication tool for students with learning disabilities? Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 371-380. 
Wolfe, E. W., Bolton, S., Feltovich, B., & Niday, D. M. (1996). The influence of student experience with word processors on the quality of essays written for a direct writing assessment. Assessing Writing, 3(2), 123-147. 
Zhang, Y. (2000). Technology and the writing skills of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 32(4), 467-478. 
5.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Dalton, B., Winbury, N., & Morocco, C. C. (1990). "If you could just push a button": Two fourth grade learning disabled students learn to use a spelling checker. Journal of Special Education Technology, 10(4), 170-191. 
Graham, S., Harris, K. R., & Larsen, L. (2001). Prevention and intervention of writing difficulties for students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 16(2), 74-84. 
Huinker, D. A. (2002). Calculators as learning tools for young children. Teaching Children Mathematics, 8(6), 316-321. 
Isaacson, S., & Gleason, M. M. (1997). Mechanical obstacles to writing: What can teachers do to help students with learning problems? Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 12(3), 188-194. 
Kirschner, P. A., & Erkens, G. (2006). Cognitive tools and mindtools for collaborative learning. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 35(2), 199-209. 
Longo, B., Reiss, D., Selfe, C. L., & Young, A. (2003). The poetics of computers: Composing relationships with technology. Computers & Composition, 20(1), 97-118. 
Macarthur, C. (1999). Overcoming barriers to writing: Computer support for basic writing skills. Reading and Writing Quarterly, 15(2), 169-192. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1996). Using technology to enhance the writing processes of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 344-354. 
Onosko, J. J., & Jorgenson, C. M. (1998). Unit and lesson planning in the inclusive classroom: Maximizing learning opportunities for all students. In C. M. Jorgenson (Ed.), Restructuring high schools for all students: Taking inclusion to the next level (pp. 71-105). Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Peterson-Karlan, G. R., Parette, H. P., & Center, S. E. A. T. (2007). Supporting struggling writers using technology: Evidence-based instruction and decision-making. Washington, D.C.: National Center for Technology Innovation. 
Quenneville, J. (2001). Tech tools for students with learning disabilities: Infusion into inclusive classrooms. Preventing School Failure, 45(4), 167-170. 
Sanderson, A. (1999). Voice recognition software. A panacea for dyslexic learners or a frustrating hindrance? Dyslexia, 5(2), 114-118. 
Sitko, M. C., Laine, C. J., & Sitko, C. (2005). Writing tools: Technology and strategies for struggling writers. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 571-598). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design. 
St John, D., & Lapp, D. A. (2000). Developing numbers and operations with affordable handheld technology. Teaching Children Mathematics, 7(3), 162-164. 
Vernon, A. (2000). Computerized grammar checkers 2000: Capabilities, limitations, and pedagogical possibilities. Computers and Composition, 17(3), 329-349. 
Williams, S. C. (2002). How speech-feedback and word-prediction software can help students write. Teaching Exceptional Children, 34(3), 72-78. 
5.3: Build fluencies with graduated levels of support for practice and performance 
To develop competence and fluency in expression or problem solving requires a long and guided apprenticeship for any learner, and a much longer or more supported apprenticeship for some. The experimental studies listed below examine the advantages of providing various scaffolds and supports during that apprenticeship.  
They include features in two main categories: 
1. models and demonstrations that guide successful practice (including exemplars, worked examples, animated agents or human mentors, direct instruction) 
2. scaffolds that support the novice but that can be gradually released as individuals are ready for independence (e.g. checklists, templates, mnemonic aids, etc.). The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces highlight the historical and pedagogical role of apprenticeships and their associated supports in developing independence. 
5.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Atkinson, R. K., Renkl, A., & Merrill, M. M. (2003). Transitioning from studying examples to solving problems: Effects of self-explanation prompts and fading worked-out steps. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(4), 774-783. 
Atkinson, R. K. (2002). Optimizing learning from examples using animated pedagogical agents. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 416-427. 
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. (2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70(2), 181-214. 
Atkinson, R. K., Mayer, R. E., & Merrill, M. M. (2005). Fostering social agency in multimedia learning: Examining the impact of an animated agent's voice. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 30(1), 117-139. 
Atkinson, R. K., & Renkl, A. (2007). Interactive example-based learning environments: Using interactive elements to encourage effective processing of worked examples. Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 375-386. 
Bui, Y. N., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (2006). The effects of a strategic writing program for students with and without learning disabilities in inclusive fifth-grade classes. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 21(4), 244-260. 
Chi, M. T. H., & Bassok, M. (1989). Learning from examples via self-explanation. In L. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser, (pp. 251-282). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Craig, S. D., Gholson, B., & Driscoll, D. M. (2002). Animated pedagogical agents in multimedia educational environments: Effects of agent properties, picture features, and redundancy. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 428-434. 
Craig, S. D., Graesser, A. C., Sullins, J., & Gholson, B. (2004). Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the role of affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of Educational Media, 29(3), 241-250. 
Dalton, B., & Strangman, N. (2006). Improving struggling readers' comprehension through scaffolded hypertexts and other computer-based literacy programs. In M. C. McKenna, L.D. Labbo, R.D. Kieffer & D. Reinking (Ed.), International handbook of literacy and technology volume II (pp. 7592). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
Dalton, B., Pisha, B., Eagleton, M., Coyne, P., & Deysher, S. (2002). Engaging the text: Final report to the U.S. department of education. Peabody: CAST. 
Dalton, B. D., Herbert, M., & Deysher, S. (2003, December). Scaffolding students' response to digital literature with embedded strategy supports: The role of audio-recording vs. writing student response options. Presented at the 53rd Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference, Scottsdale, AZ. 
Danoff, B. (1993). Incorporating strategy instruction within the writing process in the regular classroom: Effects on the writing of students with and without learning disabilities. Journal of Reading Behavior, 25(3), 295-322. 
Doering, A., & Veletsianos, G. (2007). Multi-scaffolding environment: An analysis of scaffolding and its impact on cognitive load and problem-solving ability. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 37(2), 107-129. 
Dole, J. A., Brown, K. J., & Trathen, W. (1996). The effects of strategy instruction on the comprehension performance of at-risk students. Reading Research Quarterly, 31(1), 62-77. 
Dunsworth, Q., & Atkinson, R. K. (2007). Fostering multimedia learning of science: Exploring the role of an animated agent's image. Computers & Education, 49(3), 677-690. 
Dyck, N., & Sunbye, N. (1988). The effects of text explicitness on story understanding and recall by learning disabled children. LD Research, 3(2), 68-77. 
Easterbrooks, S. R., & Stoner, M. (2006). Using a visual tool to increase adjectives in the written language of students who are deaf or hard of hearing. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 27(2), 95-109. 
Ellis, E. S., Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B. (1989). Teaching adolescents with learning disabilities to generate and use task-specific strategies. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22(2), 108-119. 
Englert, C. S., Yong, Z., Dunsmore, K., Collings, N. Y., & Wolbers, K. (2007). Scaffolding the writing of students with disabilities through procedural facilitation: Using an internet-based technology to improve performance. Learning Disability Quarterly, 30(1), 9-29. 
Etheris, A. I. (2004). Computer-supported collaborative problem solving and anchored instruction in a mathematics classroom: An exploratory study. International Journal of Learning Technology, 1(1), 16-39. 
Fisher, J. B., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1995). Searching for validated inclusive practices: A review of the literature. Focus on Exceptional Children, 28(4), 1-20. 
Gambrell, L. B., & Bales, R. (1986). Mental imagery and the comprehension-monitoring performance of fourth and fifth grade poor readers. Reading Research Quarterly, 21(4), 454-464. 
Gaytan, J. (2006). Type II applications: Using on-demand help features effectively in interactive learning environments: A literature review. Computers in the Schools, 23(1), 163-172. 
Gersten, R. (1998). Recent advances in instructional research for students with learning disabilities: An overview. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 13(3), 162-170. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Higgins, K., Boone, R., & Lovitt, T. (1996). Hypertext support for remedial students and students with disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 402-412. 
Horton, S., Lovitt, T., & Christensen, S. (1991). Notetaking from textbooks: Effects of a columnar format on three categories of secondary students. Exceptionality: A Research Journal, 2(1), 18-40. 
Idol-Maestas, L. (1985). Getting ready to read: Guided probing for poor comprehenders. Learning Disability Quarterly, 8, 243-254. 
Jacobson, M. J. (2008). A design framework for educational hypermedia systems: Theory, research, and learning emerging scientific perspectives. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56(1), 5-28. 
Lenz, B. K., Ehren, B. J., & Deshler, D. D. (2005). The content literacy continuum: A school reform framework for improving adolescent literacy for all students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 37(6), 60-63. 
Liu, M., & Bera, S. (2005). An analysis of cognitive tool use patterns in a hypermedia learning environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(1), 5-21. 
Lusk, M. M., & Atkinson, R. K. (2007). Animated pedagogical agents: Does their degree of embodiment impact learning from static or animated worked examples? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21(6), 747-764. 
MacArthur, C. A., & Haynes, J. B. (1995). Student assistant for learning from text (SALT): A hypermedia reading aid. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28(3), 150-159. 
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B., & Boonthum, C. (2004). iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active reading and thinking. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36(2), 222-233. 
McNamara, D. S., O'Reilly, T. P., Best, R. M., & Ozuru, Y. (2006). Improving adolescent students' reading comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34(2), 147-171. 
McNeill, K. L., Lizotte, D. J., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. W. (2006). Supporting students' construction of scientific explanations by fading scaffolds in instructional materials. Journal of the Sciences, 15(2), 153-181. 
Mechling, L. (2005). The effect of instructor-created video programs to teach students with disabilities: A literature review. TAM Board Members, 20(2), 25-36. 
Moran, J., Ferdig, R. E., Pearson, P. D., Wardrop, J., & Blomeyer Jr, R. L. (2008). Technology and reading performance in the middle-school grades: A meta-analysis with recommendations for policy and practice. Journal of Literacy Research, 40(1), 6-58. 
Moreno, R., Mayer, R. E., Spires, H. A., & Lester, J. C. (2001). The case for social agency in computer-based teaching: Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents? Cognition and Instruction, 19(2), 177-213. 
Moreno, R., & Flowerday, T. (2006). Students' choice of animated pedagogical agents in science learning: A test of the similarity-attraction hypothesis on gender and ethnicity. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 31(2), 186-207. 
Moreno, R., Mayer, R. E., Spires, H. A., & Lester, J. C. (2001). The case for social agency in computer-based teaching: Do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents? Cognition & Instruction, 19(2), 177-213. 
Orsmond, P., Merry, S., & Reiling, K. (2002). The use of exemplars and formative feedback when using student derived marking criteria in peer and self-assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 27(4), 309-323. 
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-monitoring activities. Cognition & Instruction, 1(1), 117-175. 
Paris, S. G., Wasik, B. A., & Turner, J. C. (1999). The development of strategic readers. In R. Barr, M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 609-640). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Pol, H. J., Harskamp, E. G., & Suhre, C. J. M. (2008). The effect of the timing of instructional support in a computer-supported problem-solving program for students in secondary physics education. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(3), 1156-1178. 
Prendinger, H., Ma, C., & Ishizuka, M. (2007). Eye movements as indices for the utility of life-like interface agents: A pilot study. Interacting with Computers, 19(2), 281-292. 
Reinking, D., & Schreiner, R. (1985). The effects of computer mediated text on measures of reading comprehension and reading behavior. Reading Research Quarterly, 20(5), 536-552. 
Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the transition from example study to problem solving in cognitive skill acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 153-22. 
Rosenshine, B. (1997). Advances in research on instruction. In J. W. Lloyd, E. J. Kameenui & D. Chard (Eds.), Issues in educating students with disabilities (pp. 197-221). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Rosenshine, B., & & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 64(4), 479-530. 
Ryokai, K., Vaucelle, C., & Cassell, J. (2003). Virtual peers as partners in storytelling and literacy learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(2), 195-208. 
Scanlon, D., Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B. (1996). Can a strategy be taught and learned in secondary inclusive classrooms? Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 11(1), 41-57. 
Van Eck, R. (2006). The effect of contextual pedagogical advisement and competition on middleschool students' attitude toward mathematics and mathematics instruction using a computerbased simulation game. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 25(2), 165-195. 
Van Merrienboer, J. J. G., Kirschner, P. A., & Kester, L. (2003). Taking the load off a learner's mind: Instructional design for complex learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 5-13. 
Wilson, R. (1996). The effects of computer-assisted versus teacher-directed instruction on the multiplication performance of elementary students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 382-390. 
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100. 
Zydney, J. M. (2008). Cognitive tools for scaffolding students defining an ill-structured problem. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 38(4), 353-385. 
5.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Burke, M. D., Hagan, S. L., & Grossen, B. (1998). What curricular designs and strategies accommodate diverse learners? Teaching Exceptional Children, 31(2), 34-38. 
Chen, D., & Hung, D. (2004). Augmentation in learning: Supports which do not fade away. Education Technology, 44(4), 60-63. 
Clark, F. L., Deshler, D. D., Schumaker, J. B., Alley, G. R., & Warner, M. M. (1984). Visual imagery and self-questioning: Strategies to improve comprehension of written material. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 17(3), 145-149. 
Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. E. (2004). E-learning and the science of instruction: Proven guidelines for consumers and designers of multimedia learning (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser.Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Corey, R. (1995). Words from music: How Mozart and Mangione inspire writers. Quarterly of the National Writing Project and the Center for the Study of Writing and Literacy, 17(3), 26-29. 
Dalton, B., & Proctor, C. P. (2007). Reading as thinking: Integrating strategy instruction in a universally designed digital literacy environment. In D.S. McNamara (Ed.), Reading Comprehension Strategies: Theories, Interventions, and Technologies, (pp. 421-439). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.. 
Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B. (1989). An instructional model for teaching students how to learn. In J. L. Graden, J. E. Zins & M. J. Curtis (Eds.), Alternative educational delivery systems: Enhancing instructional outcomes for all students (pp. 391-411). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists. 
Duffy, G. G. (2002). The case for direct explanation of strategies. In C. C. Block & M. Pressley (Eds.), Comprehension instruction (pp. 28-41). New York: Guilford. 
Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2007). Scaffolded writing: A gradual release approach to writing instruction. New York: Scholastic. 
Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2003). Writing instruction for struggling adolescent readers: A gradual release model. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 46(5), 396-407. 
Gallego, M. A., Duran, G. Z., & Scanlon, D. J. (1989). Interactive teaching and learning: Facilitating learning disabled students' transition from novice to expert. Literacy Theory and Research, 311-319. 
Gillette, Y. (2001). Pictures to print: A software scaffold to written literacy. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 16(5), 484-497. 
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., & VanLehn, K. (2005). Scaffolding deep comprehension strategies through Point&Query, AutoTutor, and iSTART. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 225-234. 
Hudson, P., Lignugaris-Kraft, B., & Miller, T. (1993). Using content enhancements to improve the performance of adolescents with learning disabilities in content classes. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 8(2), 106-126. 
Isaacson, S., & Gleason, M. M. (1997). Mechanical obstacles to writing: What can teachers do to help students with learning problems? Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 12(3), 188-194. 
Jones, B. F. (1986). Quality and equality through cognitive instruction. Educational Leadership, 43(7), 4-11. 
Kameenui, E. J., & Carnine, D. W. (1998). Effective teaching strategies that accommodate diverse learners. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. 
Kameenui, E. J., & Simmons, D. C. (1990). Designing instructional strategies: The prevention of academic learning problems. Columbus, OH: Merrill Publishing Co. 
Kim, Y., & Baylor, A. L. (2006). A social-cognitive framework for pedagogical agents as learning companions. Educational Technology Research and Development, 54(6), 569-596. 
Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with cognitive tutors. Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 239-264. 
McTighe, J., & O'Connor, K. (2005). Seven practices for effective learning. Educational Leadership, 63(3), 10-17. 
Nolet, V., & McLaughlin, M. J. (2005). Accessing the general curriculum: Including students with disabilities in standards-based reform. Newbury Park, CA: Corwin Press, Inc. 
Paris, S. G. (1986). Teaching children to guide their reading and learning. In T. E. Raphael (Ed.), The contexts of school-based literacy (pp. 115-130). New York, NY: Random House. 
Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et al. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Scaffolding: A Special Issue of the Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386. 
Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student work. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304. 
Roehler, L. R., Duffy, G. G., & Meloth, M. S. (1984). What to be direct about in direct instruction in reading: Content-only versus process-into-content. In T. E. Raphael (Ed.), The contexts of schoolbased literacy (pp. 79-95). New York, NY: Random House. 
Rose, D. H. (1995). Apprenticeship and exploration: A new approach to literacy instruction. Scholastic literacy research paper, 6, 1-8. 
Schumaker, J. B., Denton, P. H., & Deshler, D. D. (1984). The paraphrasing strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Nolan, S. M., & Alley, G. R. (1994). The self-questioning strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Zemitzsch, A., & Warner, M. W. (1993). The visual imagery strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Singer, H., & Donlan, D. (1982). Problem-solving schema with question generation for comprehension of complex short stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 17(2), 166-86. 
Sitko, M. C., Laine, C. J., & Sitko, C. (2005). Writing tools: Technology and strategies for struggling writers. In D. Edyburn, K. Higgins & R. Boone (Eds.), Handbook of special education technology research and practice (pp. 571-598). Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin: Knowledge by Design. 
Stevens, R., & Palacio-Cayetano, J. (2003). Design and performance frameworks for constructing problem-solving simulations. Cell Biology Education, 2(3), 162-179. 
Swanson, H. L. (2001). Searching for the best model for instructing students with learning disabilities. Focus on Exceptional Children, 34(2), 1-15. 
Tarver, S. G. (1996). Direct instruction. In W. Stainback, & S. Stainback (Eds.), Controversial issues confronting special education: Divergent perspectives (2nd ed.). (pp. 143-165). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Veletsianos, G. (2007). Cognitive and affective benefits of an animated pedagogical agent: Considering contextual relevance and aesthetics. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 36(4), 373-377. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1964). Thought and language. Annals of Dyslexia, 14(1), 97-98. 
6.1: Guide appropriate goal-setting 
Learning can be inaccessible when it requires effective and realistic goal-setting and where there are no options for individuals who differ in such executive functions. Long term and even short terms tasks can raise barriers to learning without the proper embedded support for such goalsetting. The experimental and quantitative evidence listed here indicates the advantages of supports - such as highly explicit goal-setting instruction, varied models, and embedded prompts and scaffolds to estimate effort and task difficulty - for this facet of executive functions. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide additional arguments for why it is important to supports students in setting their goals. Although some of these articles are dated, they nonetheless continue to provide guidance on supporting effective goal-setting. 
6.1 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Butler, D. L. (1997). The roles of goal setting and self-monitoring in students' self-regulated engagement in tasks. Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, March 24-28, 1997). 
Earley, P. C. (1985). Influence of information choice and task complexity upon goal acceptance, performance and personal goals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(3), 481-491. 
Fleming, V. M. (2002). Improving students' exam performance by introducing study strategies and goal setting. Teaching of Psychology, 29(2), 115-119. 
Fuchs, L., Butterworth, J., & Fuchs, D. (1989). Effects of ongoing curriculum-based measurement on student awareness of goals and progress. Education and Treatment of Children, 12(1), 63-72. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Karns, K., Hamlett, C. L., Katzaroff, M., & Dutka, S. (1997). Effects of taskfocused goals on low-achieving students with and without learning disabilities. American Educational Research Journal, 34(3), 513-543. 
Fuchs, L. S., Bahr, C. M., & Rieth, H. J. (1989). Effects of goal structures and performance contingencies on the math performance of adolescents with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22(9), 554-560. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Graham, S., MacArthur, C., Schwartz, S., & Page-Voth, V. (1992). Improving the compositions of students with learning disabilities using a strategy involving product and process goal setting. Exceptional Children, 58(4), 322-334. 
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (1993). The efficacy of psychological, educational, and behavioral treatment. Confirmation from meta-analysis. The American Psychologist, 48(12), 1181-1209. 
Meltzer, L. (2007). Executive function in education: From theory to practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Orsmond, P., Merry, S., & Reiling, K. (2002). The use of exemplars and formative feedback when using student derived marking criteria in peer and self-assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 27(4), 309-323. 
Punnett, B. J. (1986). Goal setting and performance among elementary school students. Journal of Educational Research, 80(1), 40-42. 
Sachs, A. (1984). Accessing scripts before reading the story. Learning Disability Quarterly, 7(3), 226228. 
Schunk, D. H. (1985). Participation in goal setting: Effects on self-efficacy and skills of learningdisabled children. Journal of Special Education, 19(3), 307-317. 
Schunk, D. H. (1996). Goal and self-evaluative influences during children's cognitive skill learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33(2), 359-382. 
Troia, G. A., & Graham, S. (2002). The effectiveness of a highly explicit, teacher-directed strategy instruction routine: Changing the writing performance of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35(4), 290-305. 
Troia, G. A., Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (1999). Teaching students with learning disabilities to mindfully plan when writing. Exceptional Children, 65(2), 235-252. 
Walberg, H. J. (1999). Productive teaching. In H. C. Waxman, & H. J. Walberg (Eds.), New directions for teaching practice and research (pp. 75-104). Berkeley, CA: McCutchen Publishing Corporation. 
Wise, K. C., & Okey, J. R. (1983). A meta-analysis of the effects of various science teaching strategies on achievement. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 20(5), 415-425. 
Wong, B. Y., Butler, D. L., Ficzere, S. A., & Kuperis, S. (1996). Teaching low achievers and students with learning disabilities to plan, write, and revise opinion essays. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(2), 197-212. 
6.1 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Anderson, A. (1997). Learning strategies in physical education: Self-talk, imagery, and goal-setting. The Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 68(1), 30-35. 
Carroll, J., & Christenson, C. N. K. (1995). Teaching and learning about student goal setting in a fifth-grade classroom. Language Arts, 72(1), 42-49. 
Dawson, P., & Guare, R. (2004). Executive skills in children and adolescents: A practical guide to assessment and intervention. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Elliot, A. J. (2005). A conceptual history of the achievement goal construct. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. 
Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 52-72). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Lemos, M. S. (1996). Students' and teachers' goals in the classroom. Learning and Instruction, 6(2), 151-171. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Rose, D., & Rose, K. (2007). Executive function processes: A curriculum-based intervention. In L. Meltzer (Ed.), Executive function in education (pp. 287-308). New York: Guilford Press. 
Schunk, D. H. (2003). Self-efficacy for reading and writing: Influence of modeling, goal setting, and self-evaluation. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 19(2), 159-172. 
6.2: Support planning and strategy development 
Learning can be inaccessible when it requires planning and strategy development, and where there are no options for individuals who differ in such executive functions. Young children, older students in a new domain, or any student with one of the disabilities that compromise executive functions (e.g. ADHD, ADD, Autism Spectrum Disorders) often are weak at planning and strategy development and impulsive trial and error dominates their learning. The experimental studies collected here suggest a variety of options to help students become more planful and strategic - explicit strategy instruction for planning and revising, concept mapping, etc. The scholarly reviews and expert opinions provide a more classroom-based perspective on effectively supporting students' planning and strategy development. 
6.2 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Chalk, J. C., Hagan-Burke, S., & Burke, M. D. (2005). The effects of self-regulated strategy development on the writing process for high school students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 28(1), 75-88. 
De La Paz, S. (2007). Managing cognitive demands for writing: Comparing the effects of instructional components in strategy instruction. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 23(3), 249-266. 
De La Paz, S., & Graham, S. (1997). Strategy instruction in planning: Teaching students with learning and writing disabilities to compose persuasive and expository essays. Learning Disability Quarterly, 20(3), 227-248. 
Englert, C. S., Manalo, M., & Zhao, Y. (2004). I can do it better on the computer: The effects of technology-enabled scaffolding on young writers' composition. Journal of Special Education Technology, 19(1), 5-22. 
Englert, C. S., Wu, X., & Zhao, Y. (2005). Cognitive tools for writing: Scaffolding the performance of students through technology. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 20(3), 184-198. 
Englert, C. S., Yong, Z., Dunsmore, K., Collings, N. Y., & Wolbers, K. (2007). Scaffolding the writing of students with disabilities through procedural facilitation: Using an internet-based technology to improve performance. Learning Disability Quarterly, 30(1), 9-29. 
Fleming, V. M. (2002). Improving students' exam performance by introducing study strategies and goal setting. Teaching of Psychology, 29(2), 115-119. 
Graham, S. (1997). Executive control in the revising of students with learning and writing difficulties. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 223-234. 
Graham, S., Harris, K. R., & Mason, L. (2005). Improving the writing performance, knowledge, and self-efficacy of struggling young writers: The effects of self-regulated strategy development. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 30(2), 207-241. 
Graham, S., & Perin, D. (2007). A meta-analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students. Journal Educational Psychology, 99(3), 445-476. 
Graham, S., MacArthur, C., Schwartz, S., & Page-Voth, V. (1992). Improving the compositions of students with learning disabilities using a strategy involving product and process goal setting. Exceptional Children, 58(4), 322-334. 
Graves, A. (1990). The effects of procedural facilitation on the story composition of learning disabled students. Learning Disabilities Research, 5(2), 88-93. 
Harris, K. R., Graham, S., & Mason, L. H. (2006). Improving the writing, knowledge, and motivation of struggling young writers: Effects of self-regulated strategy development with and without peer support. American Educational Research Journal, 43(2), 295-340. 
Meltzer, L. (2007). Executive function in education: From theory to practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Montague, M. (1991). Planning, procedural facilitation, and narrative composition of junior high students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 6(4), 219-224. 
Quinlan, T. (2004). Speech recognition technology and students with writing difficulties: Improving fluency. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 337-346. 
Rademacher, J. A., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (1996). Development and validation of a classroom assignment routine for inclusive settings. Learning Disability Quarterly, 19(3), 163-177. 
Saddler, B. (2006). Increasing story-writing ability through self-regulated strategy development: Effects on young writers with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 29(4), 291-305. 
Saddler, B., & Asaro, K. (2007). Increasing story quality through planning and revising: Effects on young writers with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 30(4), 223-234. 
Saddler, B., Moran, S., Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (2004). Preventing writing difficulties: The effects of planning strategy instruction on the writing performance of struggling writers. Exceptionality, 12(1), 3-17. 
Sturm, J. M., & Rankin-Erickson, J. L. (2002). Effects of hand-drawn and computer-generated concept mapping on the expository writing of middle school students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(2), 124-139. 
Troia, G. A., & Graham, S. (2002). The effectiveness of a highly explicit, teacher-directed strategy instruction routine: Changing the writing performance of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35(4), 290-305. 
Troia, G. A., Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (1999). Teaching students with learning disabilities to mindfully plan when writing. Exceptional Children, 65(2), 235-252. 
Wong, B. Y., Butler, D. L., Ficzere, S. A., & Kuperis, S. (1996). Teaching low achievers and students with learning disabilities to plan, write, and revise opinion essays. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(2), 197-212. 
Zipprich, M. A. (1995). Teaching web making as a guided planning tool to improve student narrative writing. Remedial and Special Education, 16(1), 3-15. 
6.2 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Baker, S., Gersten, R., & Scanlon, D. (2002). Procedural facilitators and cognitive strategies: Tools for unraveling the mysteries of comprehension and the writing process, and for providing meaningful access to the general curriculum. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(1), 65-77. 
Dawson, P., & Guare, R. (2004). Executive skills in children and adolescents: A practical guide to assessment and intervention. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (2005). Improving the writing performance of young struggling writers: Theoretical and programmatic research from the center on accelerating student learning. The Journal of Special Education, 39(1), 19-33. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1996). Using technology to enhance the writing processes of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(4), 344-354. 
Pressley, M., Goodchild, F., Fleet, J., Zajchowski, R., & Evans, E. D. (1989). The challenges of classroom strategy instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 89(3), 301-342. 
Pressley, M., Yokoi, L., Rankin, J., Wharton-McDonald, R., & Mistretta, J. (1997). A survey of the instructional practices of grade 5 teachers nominated as effective in promoting literacy. Scientific Studies of Reading, 1(2), 145-160. 
Rankin, V. (1999). The thoughtful researcher: Teaching the research process to middle school students. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.. 
Rose, D., & Rose, K. (2007). Executive function processes: A curriculum-based intervention. In L. Meltzer (Ed.), Executive function in education (pp. 287-308). New York: Guilford Press. 
6.3: Facilitate managing information and resources 
Learning can be inaccessible when it requires the ability to manage information and resources, and where there are no options for individuals who differ in such executive functions. Wherever executive functions or working memory capacity are not construct-relevant in a lesson, it is important to provide a variety of internal scaffolds and external organizational aids to keep information organized and "in mind." The research listed here suggests the effectiveness of strategies such as graphic and cognitive organizers, concept maps, explicit instruction in how to evaluate information, and templates for note-taking. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide more classroom-based perspectives on facilitating students' management of information and resources. 
6.3 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Alvermann, D. E., & Boothby, P. R. (1986). Children's transfer of graphic organizer instruction. Reading Psychology, 7(2), 87-100. 
Anderson-Inman, L., Knox-Quinn, C., & Horney, M. A. (1996). Computer-based study strategies for students with learning disabilities: Individual differences associated with adoption level. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(5), 461-484. 
Boon, R. T., Burke, M. D., Fore III, C., & Spencer, V. G. (2006). The impact of cognitive organizers and technology-based practices on student success in secondary social studies classrooms. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(1), 5-15. 
Boon, R. T., Fore, C., Ayres, K., & Spencer, V. G. (2005). The effects of cognitive organizers to facilitate content-area learning for students with mild disabilities: A pilot study. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 32(2), 101-118. 
Bowler, L. (2001). Primary school students, information literacy and the web. Education for Information, 19(3), 201-223. 
Boyle, J. R., & Weishaar, M. (1997). The effects of expert-generated versus student-generated cognitive organizers on the reading comprehension of students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 12(4), 228-235. 
Carnes, E. R., Lindbeck, J. S., & Griffin, C. F. (1987). Effects of group size and advance organizers on learning parameters when using microcomputer tutorials in kinematics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 24(9), 781-789. 
Clements-Davis, G. L., & Ley, T. C. (1991). Thematic preorganizers and the reading comprehension of tenth-grade world literature students. Reading Research & Instruction, 31(1), 43-53. 
Coiro, J., & Dobler, E. (2007). Exploring the online reading comprehension strategies used by sixthgrade skilled readers to search for and locate information on the internet. Reading Research Quarterly, 42(2), 214-257. 
Darch, C. B., Carnine, D. W., & Kammeenui, E. J. (1986). The role of graphic organizers and social structure in content area instruction. Journal of Reading Behavior, 18(4), 275-295. 
De La Paz, S. (2007). Managing cognitive demands for writing: Comparing the effects of instructional components in strategy instruction. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 23(3), 249-266. 
Evans, S. W., Pelham, W., & Grudberg, M. V. (1994). The efficacy of notetaking to improve behavior and comprehension of adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Exceptionality, 5(1), 1-17. 
Garcia-Mila, M. (2007). Developmental change in notetaking during scientific inquiry. International Journal of Science Education, 29(8), 1035-1058. 
Guinee, K., Eagleton, M., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Adolescents' internet search strategies: Drawing upon familiar cognitive paradigms when accessing electronic information sources. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 29(3), 363-374. 
Guinee, K., & Eagleton, M. B. (2006). Spinning straw into gold: Transforming information into knowledge during web-based research. English Journal, 95(4), 46-52. 
Herl, H. E., O'Neil, H. F. J., Chung, G. K. W. K., & Schacter, J. (1999). Reliability and validity of a computer-based knowledge mapping system to measure content understanding. Computers in Human Behavior, 15(3-4), 315-333. 
Horton, S., Lovitt, T., & Christensen, S. (1991). Notetaking from textbooks: Effects of a columnar format on three categories of secondary students. Exceptionality: A Research Journal, 2(1), 18-40. 
Horton, S. V., Lovitt, T. C., Givens, A., & Nelson, R. (1989). Teaching social studies to high school students with academic handicaps in a mainstreamed setting: Effects of a computerized study guide. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 22(2), 102-107. 
Idol-Maestas, L. (1985). Getting ready to read: Guided probing for poor comprehenders. Learning Disability Quarterly, 8(4), 243-254. 
Kim, A. H., Vaughn, S., & Wanzek, J. (2004). Graphic organizers and their effects on the reading comprehension of students with LD: A synthesis of research. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37(2), 105-118. 
Kooy, T. (1992). The effect of graphic advance organizers on math and science comprehension with high school special education students. B.C. Journal of Special Education, 16(2), 101-111. 
Kuiper, E., Volman, K., & Terwel, J. (2004). The internet as an information resource in education: A review of the literature. Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA. 
McCrory Wallace, R., Kupperman, J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). Science on the web: Students online in a sixth-grade classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(1), 75-104. 
McNabb, M. L., Hassel, B., & Steiner, L. (2000). Literacy learning on the net: An exploratory study. Oak Brook, IL:North Central Regional Educational Laboratory. 
Meltzer, L. (2007). Executive function in education: From theory to practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Moore, D. W., & Readence, J. E. (1984). A quantitative and qualitative review of graphic organizer research.Journal of Educational Research, 78(1), 11-17. 
Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept maps and vee diagrams: Two metacognitive tools to facilitate meaningful learning.Instructional Science, 19(1), 29-52. 
Puntambekar, S., & Goldstein, J. (2007). Effect of visual representation of the conceptual structure of the domain on science learning and navigation in a hypertext environment. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 16(4), 429-459. 
Robinson, D. H., Katayama, A. D., Beth, A., Odom, S., Hsieh, Y. P., & Vanderveen, A. (2006). Increasing text comprehension and graphic note taking using a partial graphic organizer. The Journal of Educational Research, 100(2), 103-111. 
Royer, R., & Royer, J. (2004). Comparing hand drawn and computer generated concept mapping. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Technology, 23(1), 67-81. 
Shin, E. C., Schallert, D. L., & Savenye, W. C. (1994). Effects of learner control, advisement, and prior knowledge on young students' learning in a hypertext environment. Educational Technology Research and Development, 42(1), 33-46. 
Swanson, H. L., & Deshler, D. (2003). Instructing adolescents with learning disabilities: Converting a meta-analysis to practice. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 36(2), 124-135. 
Townsend, M. A. R., & Clarihew, A. (1989). Facilitating children's comprehension through the use of advanced organizers. Journal of Reading Behavior, 21(1), 15-31. 
Troia, G. A., & Graham, S. (2002). The effectiveness of a highly explicit, teacher-directed strategy instruction routine: Changing the writing performance of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35(4), 290-305. 
Troia, G. A., Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (1999). Teaching students with learning disabilities to mindfully plan when writing. Exceptional Children, 65(2), 235-252. 
Willerman, M., & Mac Harg, R. A. (1991). The concept map as an advance organizer. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28(8), 705-712. 
6.3 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Cassidy, J. (1989). Using graphic organizers to develop critical thinking. Gifted Child Today, 12(6), 34-36. 
Dalton, B., & Grisham, D. L. (2001). Teaching students to evaluate internet information critically. Reading Online, 5(5). Retrieved June 23, 2009, from http://www.readingonline.org/editorial/edit_index.asp?HREF=/editorial/december2001/index.ht ml. 
Dawson, P., & Guare, R. (2004). Executive skills in children and adolescents: A practical guide to assessment and intervention. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Dye, G. A. (2000). Graphic organizers to the rescue! Helping students link - and remember - information. Teaching Exceptional Children, 32(3), 72-76. 
Eagleton, M., & Guinee, K. (2002). Strategies for supporting student internet inquiry. New England Reading Association Journal, 38(2), 39-47. 
Eagleton, M. B., & Dobler, E. (2006). Reading the web: Strategies for internet inquiry. New York: Guilford Press. 
Eagleton, M. B., Guinee, K., & Langlais, K. (2003). Teaching internet literacy strategies: The hero inquiry project.Voices from the Middle, 10(3), 28-35. 
Egan, M. (1999). Reflections on effective use of graphic organizers. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 42(8), 641-645. 
Frey, N., & Fisher, D. (2007). Reading for information in elementary school: Content literacy strategies to build comprehension. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill/Prentice Hall. 
Henry, L. A. (2006). SEARCHing for an answer: The critical role of new literacies while reading on the internet. The Reading Teacher, 59(7), 614-627. 
Hughes, C. A., & Suritsky, S. K. (1993). Notetaking skills and strategies for students with learning disabilities.Preventing School Failure, 38(1), 7-11. 
Ives, B., & Hoy, C. (2003). Graphic organizers applied to higher-level secondary mathematics. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 18(1), 36-51. 
Kafai, Y., & Bates, M. J. (1997). Internet web-searching instruction in the elementary classroom: Building a foundation for information literacy. School Library Media Quarterly, 25(2), 103-111. 
Mastropieri, M. A., Scruggs, T. E., & Graetz, J. E. Reading comprehension instruction for secondary students:Challenges for struggling readers and teachers. Learning Disability Quarterly, 26(1), 103116. 
Merkley, D. M., & Jefferies, D. (2001). Guidelines for implementing a graphic organizer. The Reading Teacher, 54(4), 350-357. 
Mosco, M. (2005). Getting the information graphically. Arts and Activities, 138(1), 44-44. 
Novak, J. D. & Canas, A. J. (2008). The theory underlying concept maps and how to construct them. Technical Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.. Retrieved September 8, 2009 from 
http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.pdf 
Rankin, V. (1999). The thoughtful researcher: Teaching the research process to middle school students.Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.. 
Rock, M. L. (2004). Graphic organizers: Tools to foster behavior literacy and foster emotional competency.Intervention in School and Clinic, 40(1), 10-37. 
Rose, D., & Rose, K. (2007). Executive function processes: A curriculum-based intervention. In L. Meltzer (Ed.), Executive function in education (pp. 287-308). New York: Guilford Press. 
Sandieson, R. (2006). Pathfinding in the research forest: The pearl harvesting method for effective information retrieval. Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, 41(4), 401-409. 
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-
68. 
Schachter, J., Chung, G., & Shorr, A. (1998). Children's internet searching on complex problems: Performance and process analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(9), 840-849. 
Sorapure, M., Inglesby, P., & Yatchisin, G. (1998). Web literacy: Challenges and opportunities for research in a new medium. Computers and Composition, 15(3), 409-424. 
Strangman, N., & Hall, T. E. (2002). Graphic organizers. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
Strangman, N., Hall, T. E., & Meyer, A. (2003). Graphic organizers with UDL. Wakefield, MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. 
Sutherland-Smith, W. (2002). Weaving the literacy web: Changes in reading from page to screen. Reading Teacher, 55(7), 662-669. 
6.4: Enhance capacity for monitoring progress 
Learning can be inaccessible when it requires the ability to monitor one's own progress, and where there are no options for individuals who differ in such executive abilities. The experimental research collected here suggests the effectiveness of strategies such as explicit instruction for self-monitoring, guiding questions for self-questioning and prediction, and curriculum-based measurement. The scholarly reviews and opinion pieces provide additional arguments for why it is important to enhance students' capacity for monitoring progress. 
6.4 Experimental & Quantitative Evidence 
Bahr, M. W., Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Fernstrom, P., & Stecker, P. M. (1993). Effectiveness of student versus teacher monitoring during prereferral intervention. Exceptionality, 4(1), 17-30. 
Butler, D. L. (1997). The roles of goal setting and self-monitoring in students' self-regulated engagement in tasks.Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, March 24-28, 1997). 
Calhoon, M. B., & Fuchs, L. S. (2003). The effects of peer-assisted learning strategies and curriculum-based measurement on the mathematics performance of secondary students with disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 24(4), 235-245. 
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2005). Engagement, disengagement, coping, and catastrophe. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 527-547). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Chalk, J. C., Hagan-Burke, S., & Burke, M. D. (2005). The effects of self-regulated strategy development on the writing process for high school students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 28(1), 75-88. 
Chang, M. M. (2007). Enhancing web-based language learning through self-monitoring. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(3), 187-196. 
Cioffi, G., & Carney, J. J. (1997). Dynamic assessment of composing abilities in children with learning disabilities.Educational Assessment, 4(3), 175-202. 
Davis, L. B. (1995). "Will CBM help me learn?" Student perceptions of the benefits of curriculumbased measurement. Education and Treatment of Children, 18(1), 19-32. 
de Bruin, A. B. H. (2007). Improving metacomprehension accuracy and self-regulation in cognitive skill acquisition:The effect of learner expertise. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 19(4/5), 671-688. 
Duffy, G. G., Roehler, L. R., Sivan, E., Rackliffe, G., Book, C., Meloth, M., Vavrus, L.G., Wesselman, R., Putnam, J. & Bassiri, D. (1987). Effects of explaining the reasoning associated with using reading strategies. Reading Research Quarterly, 22(3), 347-368. 
Fuchs, L., Butterworth, J., & Fuchs, D. (1989). Effects of ongoing curriculum-based measurement on student awareness of goals and progress. Education and Treatment of Children, 12(1), 63-72. 
Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (1992). Identifying a measure for monitoring student reading progress. School Psychology Review, 21(1), 45-58. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., & Hamlett, C. L. (1989). Effects of instrumental use of curriculum-based measurement to enhance instructional programs. RASE: Remedial Special Education, 10(2), 43-52. 
Graham, S. (1997). Executive control in the revising of students with learning and writing difficulties. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(2), 223-234. 
King, A. (1991). Improving lecture comprehension: Effects of a metacognitive strategy. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 5(4), 331-346. 
Lane, K. L., Harris, K. R., Graham, S., Weisenbach, J. L., Brindle, M., & Morphy, P. (2008). The effects of self-regulated strategy development on the writing performance of second-grade students with behavioral and writing difficulties. The Journal of Special Education, 41(4), 234-253. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1991). Effects of a reciprocal peer revision strategy in special education classrooms. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 6(4), 201-210. 
MacArthur, C. A. (1991). Knowledge of revision and revising behavior among students with learning disabilities.Learning Disability Quarterly, 14(1), 61-73. 
Malone, L. D., & Mastropieri, M. A. (1992). Reading comprehension instruction: Summarization and self-monitoring training for students with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 58(3), 270279. 
Mason, L. H. (2004). Explicit self-regulated strategy development versus reciprocal questioning: Effects on expository reading comprehension among struggling readers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 283-296. 
McNaughton, D. (1997). Proofreading for students with learning disabilities: Integrating computer and strategy use.Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 12(1), 16-28. 
Meltzer, L. (2007). Executive function in education: From theory to practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Nolan, T. E. (1991). Self-questioning and prediction: Combining metacognitive strategies. Journal of Reading, 35(2), 132-138. 
Paris, S., Cross, D., & Lipson, M. (1984). Informed strategies for learning: A program to improve children's reading awareness and comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(6), 12391252. 
Paris, S. G., Wasik, B. A., & Turner, J. C. (1999). The development of strategic readers. In R. Barr, M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 609-640). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Phillips, N. B. (1993). Combining classwide curriculum-based measurement and peer tutoring to help general educators provide adaptive education. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 8(3), 148-156. 
Reid, R., & Lienemann, T. O. (2006). Self-regulated strategy development for written expression with students with attention Deficit/Hyperactivity disorder. Exceptional Children, 73(1), 53-68. 
Saddler, B. (2006). Increasing story-writing ability through self-regulated strategy development: Effects on young writers with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 29(4), 291-305. 
Sawyer, R. J. (1992). Direct teaching, strategy instruction, and strategy instruction with explicit self-regulation:Effects on the composition skills and self-efficacy of students with learning disabilities. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84(3), 340-352. 
Schunk, D. H. (1996). Goal and self-evaluative influences during children's cognitive skill learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33(2), 359. 
Schunk, D. H., & Zimmerman, B. J. (1997). Developing self-efficacious readers and writers: The role of social and self-regulatory processes. In J. T. Guthrie, & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Reading engagement: Motivating readers through integrated instruction (pp. 34-50). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Stecker, P. M., & Fuchs, L. S. (2000). Effecting superior achievement using curriculum-based measurement: The importance of individual progress monitoring. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 15(3), 128-134. 
Stecker, P. M., Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (2005). Using curriculum-based measurement to improve student achievement: Review of research. Psychology in the Schools, 42(8), 795-819. 
Stoddard, B., & MacArthur, C. A. (1993). A peer editor strategy: Guiding learning-disabled students in response and revision. Research in the Teaching of English, 27(1), 76-103. 
Torrance, M., Fidalgo, R., & García, J. N. (2007). The teachability and effectiveness of cognitive selfregulation in sixth-grade writers. Learning and Instruction, 17(3), 265-285. 
Wong, B. Y. L., & Jones, W. (1982). Increasing metacomprehension in learning disabled and normally achieving students through self-questioning training. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 5(3), 228-240. 
Wong, B. Y., Butler, D. L., Ficzere, S. A., & Kuperis, S. (1996). Teaching low achievers and students with learning disabilities to plan, write, and revise opinion essays. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(2), 197-212. 
6.4 Scholarly Reviews & Expert Opinions 
Baker, L., & Brown, A.L. (1984). Metacognitive skills and reading. In P.D. Pearson, M. Kamil, R. Barr, & P. Mosenthal (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (vol. 1, pp. 353-394). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Campione, J. C., & Brown, A. L. (1987). Linking dynamic assessment with school achievement. In C. S. Lidz (Ed.), Dynamic assessment: An international approach to evaluating learning potential (pp. 82115). New York, New York: Guilford. 
Carroll, J., & Christenson, C. N. K. (1995). Teaching and learning about student goal setting in a fifth-grade classroom. Language Arts, 72(1), 42-49. 
Dawson, P., & Guare, R. (2004). Executive skills in children and adolescents: A practical guide to assessment and intervention. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Fuchs, L. S. (2004). The past, present, and future of curriculum-based measurement research. School Psychology Review, 33(2), 188-193. 
Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (1999). Monitoring student progress toward the development of reading competence: A review of three forms of classroom-based assessment. School Psychology Review, 28(4), 659-671. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. L., Phillips, N. B., & Bentz, J. (1994). Classwide curriculum-based measurement: Helping general educators meet the challenge of student diversity. Exceptional Children, 60(6), 518-537. 
Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (1997). It can be taught, but it does not develop naturally: Myths and realities in writing instruction. School Psychology Review, 26(3), 414-424. 
Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (2005). Improving the writing performance of young struggling writers: Theoretical and programmatic research from the center on accelerating student learning. The Journal of Special Education, 39(1), 19-33. 
Harris, K. R., & Graham, S. (1992). Helping young writers master the craft: Strategy instruction and self regulation in the writing process. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 
Harris, K. R., Graham, S., & Mason, L. H. (2003). Self-regulated strategy development in the classroom: Part of a balanced approach to writing instruction for students with disabilities. Focus on Exceptional Children, 35(7), 1-16. 
MacArthur, C. (1994). Peers + word processing + strategies= A powerful combination for revising student writing. Teaching Exceptional Children, 27(1), 24-29. 
Marzano, R. J. (2007). The art and science of teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Montague, M. (2007). Self-regulation and mathematics instruction. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 22(1), 75-83. 
Paris, S. G. (1986). Teaching children to guide their reading and learning. In T. E. Raphael (Ed.), The contexts of school-based literacy (pp. 115-130). New York, NY: Random House. 
Perry, N. E., VandeKamp, K. O., Mercer, L. K., & Nordby, C. J. (2002). Investigating teacher-student interactions that foster self-regulated learning. Educational Psychologist, 37(1), 5-15. 
Rankin, V. (1999). The thoughtful researcher: Teaching the research process to middle school students. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc. 
Reid, R. (1996). Research in self-monitoring with students with learning disabilities: The present, the prospects, the pitfalls. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 317-331. 
Rose, D., & Rose, K. (2007). Executive function processes: A curriculum-based intervention. In L. Meltzer (Ed.), Executive function in education (pp. 287-308). New York: Guilford Press. 
Schumaker, J. B., Deshler, D. D., Nolan, S. M., & Alley, G. R. (1994). The self-questioning strategy. Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas. 
Shinn, M. R. (1989). Curriculum-based measurement: Assessing special children. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Vye, N. J., Schwartz, D. L., Bransford, J. D., Barron, B. J., Zech, L. and Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1998). SMART environments that support monitoring, reflection, and revision. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in Educational Theory and Practice (pp. 305-346). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Webre, E. C. (2005). Enhancing reading success with collaboratively created progress charts. Intervention in School and Clinic, 40(5), 291-295. 
Wiggins, G. (1998). Educative assessment: Designing assessments to inform and improve student performance. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (2005). The hidden dimension of personal competence: Self regulated learning and practice. In A. J. Elliot, & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 509-526). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
 
 
UDL Guidelines Version 2.2 

UDL Guidelines Version 2.2 

1 

1 

UDL Guidelines Version 2.2 

1 

