Indigo(tm)
User Guide
Updated January 28, 2026 





American Printing House
Louisville, KY
E-mail:Support@APH.org 
Web: www.APH.org

(c) APH, 2025


IMPORTANT NOTICE FOR ALL USERS 
Indigo(tm) is designed to convey similar information as displayed on commercial global positioning system (GPS) products and location databases to people who are blind or visually impaired. Indigo(tm) products have similar limitations as commercial GPS products. These limitations include:
* Lack of information about the physical road characteristics such as elevation, overpasses/underpasses, bridges, sidewalks, traffic controls, unsafe neighborhoods, construction and other hazards.
* Map accuracy in newly developed areas. 
* Traffic and weather conditions.
* Loss of GPS signals and map data due to poor cell coverage, tall buildings or other interference.
* Routes may not be safe or possible to follow. 

The individual user is wholly responsible for all issues related to personal safety and mobility. American Printing House (APH) and its representatives advise all users that GPS is not a substitute for orientation and mobility with a cane or guide dog and recommend that users have good mobility skills before using GPS orientation information to travel. Extreme caution should be used when operating GPS as a pedestrian and should never be actively used while navigating busy traffic situations. APH and its representatives assume no liability for accidents or injuries that occur to users while using any GPS product.

Table of Contents

Getting Started 
Setting Expectations
General App Info 
Installation 
Subscription Registration for Indigo(tm)
About Maps 
Indigo(tm) Functions 
Launch Aira 
Automatic LookAround mode 
LookAround Wand 
Route 
Route Creation Screen 
Route loaded screen 
Magic Tap Gesture 
Route Shake Feature 
Getting Warmer 
Create Route via BlindSquare and GoodMaps 
Location/ Where Am I? 
Location Shake Feature 
Points of Interest (POIs) 
POI Search 
POI Action Buttons 
POI Shake Feature 
User POIs 
Adding User POIs 
Shortcut Gesture to Add User POIs 
Editing or Deleting User POIs 
Sharing User POIs 
Settings 
Background Operation, On/Off 
General Settings 
Routing Settings 
LookAround Settings 
About Settings 
Subscription Settings 
Indigo(tm) General Notes 
Battery consumption 
Interrupting the app 
Position Accuracy 
Audio Events 
Contact APH 
Haptics List
Getting Started
Setting Expectations
Indigo(tm) is a fully accessible turn-by-turn GPS app, available on iOS and Android for free. It is available in many countries. If not available in your country, contact APH to request that it is added.  At this time, this user guide is available only in English. Language localization will expand to other countries over time. There may be minor differences between Android and iOS versions. Indigo works with Android 10 and above and IOS 15 and above.

An audio tutorial is available on the Indigo webpage under the Manuals & Downloads section.
https://www.aph.org/product/indigo/#main

Indigo has the common navigation features plus features unique to blind users, such as:
* four important tabs on the bottom of most screens: Routes, Location, POIs and Settings.
* At intersections, the street name and your direction of travel are announced.
* Intersections are described (e.g. four-way) with the clock face orientation of the streets. 
* POI data is provided by Foursquare, and you can add your own user points.
* Directions are announced for Walking and Driving routes, including heads-up announcements and tones for approaching turns, turn now with the blinker sound, continue straight and the subsequent turn. 
* Unique haptics accompany the verbal announcements for Approaching, Left, Right and Continue Straight. 
Right turn, three long vibrations, (Morse Code, O) repeated three times 
Left turn, four short vibrations, (Morse Code, H)repeated three times 
Continue Straight, Long/short/long/short, one time, (Morse Code C) 
Approaching turn. The same pattern as the turns but vibrating once rather than three times.
Destination, three short/one long (Morse Code, V)
 
If one wanders off the route, you are asked if you want to recalculate. You have about five seconds to respond or the app automatically recalculates the route.  

The LookAround Wand in the upper right corner works when you are stationary, under 1.5 MPH. Lay the phone flat and point it in a given direction to hear what is nearby. Haptics will trigger at North, East, South and West when you rotate the phone. North is long/short, East is one short vibration, South is three short vibrations, and West is short/long/long. 
Up to five points of interest or intersections will be announced to a maximum of ten miles in a given direction. The wand is searching with a 30 degree angle. If you are pointed North at zero degrees, the wand will be looking from 345 degrees to 15 degrees. When you rotate the phone, a new swath of 30 degrees will be searched and announced.   

General App Info

The map and POI data may change over time. Because the apps are currently server-based, customers will have instantaneous access to the data provided by the map and POI suppliers. 

Installation
Select the installation link after finding the app in the store and tap to install Indigo(tm) on your device. Note that the app is called Indigo Nav in the store and Indigo on the phone screen. You will be prompted to confirm that you would like to install Indigo(tm), swipe to the Install button and follow the prompts. 

Registering Indigo
Under the Account Creation page, you can continue as a guest or register as a user. Note, if you register as a guest, you will not have access to User points of interest. When you are registered, your user points of interest will be remembered. The Account Creation page may occasionally come up even when you are already registered. Just enter your information to regain access. 

You have two options for registration, by phone number or by email. If you choose by email address, make sure to check your Spam folder for the verification email if you don't find it in your email Inbox. Click on the verification link in that email. If you don't find an email, switch to the phone registration. If you choose the phone number, you will first hear a country code button; click on that if you need to change it. Otherwise, choose the text field and enter your phone number on the virtual number pad. Then click on the Send Code button. Enter that 6-digit verification code and tap the Submit Button. You will need to register if you wish to maintain and share a user database of points you create. 

The Welcome to Indigo(tm) page is where you can read the license agreement and useful tips. Once you have read this information, you need to select the Accept button to proceed into the app. If you do not agree with the terms, you can select the Exit button to exit the application.
You are prompted to confirm that you allow Indigo(tm) to use your current position. After hearing the loading jingle and User POI loading message, the Location screen will open. It may take a few seconds before Indigo(tm) announces the nearest address, heading , and POI on the Location screen.

Now, select the Settings Menu so you can set your application preferences. If you enter the program and receive a notice that Location Services are not enabled in this device, you will need to enable that in your phone's settings. Go to Settings, select Privacy, select Location Services and select On. Also, under the Main heading Settings is a listing of all the apps. You can turn Location Services on and off there too.

About Maps
Maps are an integral part of the GPS software's capabilities. The map data is developed and maintained by the map supplier. Because the maps from Indigo(tm) are stored on a server, there are a few items to keep in mind.  The advantage of having maps stored on the server is that you get real-time map and POI data updates. 

If you lose cell coverage, you temporarily lose access to the online map and POI data. If you have a route loaded, it will continue to work with the Getting Warmer indications if you stay on that route, but you will not be able to recalculate a route until the cell data connection has been reestablished. The Indigo app caches one square mile of intersections, including railroad crossings, on your phone. However, automatic LookAround announcements such as intersections and POIs (Points Of Interest) will not be announced.
The next turn and destination as well as the route ETA will update even when there is no phone service. It will not recalculate if you go off-route but if you stay on the route, the information is updated. 

The POI system will query the server by default every 10 seconds. The timer can be increased if there are too many POIs being announced.
Indigo(tm) Functions
On the Indigo(tm) location screen, there are three functions on the top of the screen, Launch Aira, LookAround Wand and GPS/Virtual position On/Off.  

Next is the Where-Am-I information in the top third of the screen showing the nearby location, direction, nearest POI and last virtual position. A shake of the phone repeats this "Where-Am-I" information . 

In the bottom third of the screen, you find the button to set your Virtual Position to the current GPS position. Then, there is a More Info button before the Routes tab with  GPS speed, accuracy and altitude.   Finally, there are four tabs on the bottom of most screens, Routes, Location, POIs and Settings. 

Now that you have access to the Global Positioning System with the streets and POIs using your device, what can you do with it? Here is where the fun begins!
For example:
I am a blind person in a car or bus, with minimal knowledge about environmental information whizzing by my vehicle. I load Indigo(tm) app and the Point of Interest "look-around" feature automatically announces a sampling of Points of Interest I am passing.  When I am stationary, I can turn on the LookAround wand and point in any direction to hear about POIs and intersections.

If I happen to pass an Aira Access point, the app will notify me. If I choose to enter that business, I can call an Aira agent for visual assistance. So, for example, if I need sighted assistance while completing my ATM withdrawal or finding the orange juice, I can call an Aira agent and get assistance reading print signs or text. 
I want to meet up with my friends at a restaurant called Lakeside Grill. I selected the POI Menu on the bottom of the screen. I input "Lakeside" in the text field and select the Search button. Using Smart Search, the app is able to provide a list of suggested matches using your search text. After the POI list is created, I locate Lakeside Grill in the list of POIs then select it to hear details about Lakeside Grill, call them, view the menu (if available), or create a route to get me there. Flick up to set the POI as a Virtual position. 

You can explore a turning point virtually in a route as follows. Create a route; go to Route details; tap on the route point you want to explore; you will hear a tone indicating you have switched to virtual; go to the POI tab and do a nearby search; the nearest POIs will come up relative to that route turning point. You can tap on the button in the upper right corner to switch from Virtual back to GPS. In this way, you could search for a lunch spot on your route ahead of your GPS position and it is saved for future reference. Note that when you are in Virtual mode, you will hear a reminder periodically, so you don't confuse it with GPS mode.

Should you wish to explore a route virtually, here are the steps. Choose the address or POI for the starting point and choose Virtual from the route list. You will now be in Virtual mode at that address. Set a destination by POI name or address. Choose the route type from the list. Choose the Route details to hear the turning points in the route.

As you can see from reading these scenarios, there are two general ways to use Indigo(tm). The first and probably most popular use of the GPS information is simply to be aware of one's environment with the "look-around" options. Traditionally, a blind person might get one percent of location information through a "sighted-person filter." With Indigo(tm), a blind user can independently "look around" and hear what businesses, addresses and intersections are nearby.
The second general use of Indigo(tm) is to navigate to a specific destination along a route created by the program. 
 
These routes can of course be used in conjunction with the Look-Around information.
Indigo(tm) provides the opportunity for users to get information beyond the reach of their other senses. Visually impaired users will understand how valuable it is to know the names on signs they might see but cannot read. 

Tap the Aira button to launch the Aira app and you will be connected to an Aira agent if you have the Aira app installed.
If you do not have Aira installed, it will take you to the App Store so that you can download the app. Note that there are many free Aira access locations so you can use Aira even if you do not have a subscription. 
LookAround
There are two distinct LookAround modes of Indigo(tm), the Automatic LookAround mode and the LookAround Wand. They both tell you what is around, but the LookAround Wand provides the option to search your surroundings by pointing your phone in a specific direction while stationary. Note, LookAround announcements will not work if you lose your network connection.

Comprehensive intersection announcements may not be available in all countries where the app is authorized. If you wish a country intersection database to be added, please submit a request. The more requests we receive, the more likely that country will be added. All other POI and street data should work fine.
Automatic LookAround mode
The Automatic LookAround mode is on by default and works if you are moving or if you are stationary. It searches in all directions every 10 seconds or in your choice of several intervals up to 60 seconds, and it reports the nearest POI or intersection to you. In a dense area, it doesn't have to look very far. You can of course search for all points of interest manually and can expand the search if nothing nearby is found up to 62 miles.

In addition to the nearest POI and intersection announcements, you will also get automatic announcements to let you know when you have changed direction or changed streets if you have set your speed in LookAround settings to under 5MPH.

LookAround Wand
When stationary, the LookAround Wand allows you to find out a sampling of what is in the 		direction you point the phone. For example, if you want to know what is to the right, point your phone to the right and the intersection and a sampling of points of interest will be announced. 

The LookAround Wand button is on the top right of the screen. You can toggle it off and on. When the LookAround Wand is turned on, you will hear a rising chime, the button will light up, and Voiceover will confirm that the LookAround Wand is on. When the LookAround Wand is turned off, you will hear a descending chime, the button will turn gray, and Voiceover will confirm that the LookAround Wand is off. Remember that if you are moving and turning it on, no information will be given until you stop moving for 15 seconds or so. Also, if you switch screens, the LookAround wand will automatically turn off. The wand will announce up to five points in the direction you are pointing, including an intersection in that direction to a maximum of 62 miles. There is a haptic vibration every 90 degrees. As you rotate your phone, you will feel the vibration along with a verbal announcement of the compass direction, North, East, South, West .  

Routes	
There are two route screens, the Route Creation Screen and the Route loaded screen.
Route Creation Screen 
Once you select the Route Menu, you will be prompted, "Create a Route to Where?" You have six options:
1. Home - If you have set your home address in the Settings screen, that address will be used when you choose this button. If you haven't yet set your Home Address, you will be prompted to do so. You can enter your home address by manually typing the Address, using your Current Position, or Selecting your address from your phone's contacts database. We recommend setting your home address based on your current position. So, stand outside your front door or at the top of the driveway, make sure you have a good position and then set the address from within the Settings General menu. 

2. Points of Interest - If you select this button, the POI Search screen will load. You can either enter text in the search field or select User POIs, Indoor, or a POI category. On iPhones, the search field is powered by Apple MapIt Smart Search. The POI data is provided by Foursquare. Once you start typing, it will provide suggested matches. Next, select the Search button to start searching for POIs for the closest match to what you typed. If you need to clear the search text field, there is a Clear-text button. If you want to search for a POI within a specific category, select a category from the list presented in the lower half of the screen (i.e. Food, Lodging, Entertainment, etc.). Once you select a category, you will hear nearby POIs in that category sorted by proximity. If you would like to search for a specific POI enter it into the POI Search Text field. Once you have entered the POI Search text, select the Search button. If there are matching POIs containing the text you have entered, you will be presented with a list of POIs from which to choose. If you do not find your POI within that list, you can select the More button which enables you to continue searching over a greater distance. 
Once you select the correct POI from the list, the POI Details screen will load. The POI address and phone will be listed if they are in the database. The POI distance will be listed along with up to ten action buttons: 
i. The Walk button will create a pedestrian route to the POI.
ii. The Drive button will create a vehicular route to the POI.
iii. The Getting Warmer button announces line-of-sight distance and direction to the POI.
iv. Set as Virtual position. This will both set and move you to the virtual position. You can switch back to GPS position with the button in the upper right of the screen.
v. Transit will create combined directions of walking and transit to the POI. 
vi. The Bicycle button will create a bicycle route to the POI.
vii. The Uber button will launch Uber if you have it installed on your phone and the POI you chose will populate the Uber destination field. You can then request a ride from within the Uber app to the POI.
viii. The Call Button (if available) will call the POI
. You will be asked to confirm that you want to place the call, select Yes to place the call. Note, the call button is omitted when there is no phone number and if you are running the app on an iPad.
ix. Some restaurant POIs  will have a food Menu button.
x. The POI Feedback button has options to remove or flag a Foursquare POI.




3. Street Address - Select this button to create a route to a specific address. The search field is powered by Apple MapIt Smart Search on iPhones, so once you start typing it will provide suggested matches. Start by typing the street number, then the street name. Once you double tap on the search field, the number keyboard will load onto the bottom portion of your screen, type the Street Address number. Once you press the Space key, the Letter keyboard will replace the number keyboard so you can type the Street name. You can usually get a match without entering Street, Avenue, Lane, Way, etc. Next, select the Search button to start searching for addresses matching what you typed. Once you select the desired address, you will need to choose your preferred route mode. Choose from Walk, Drive, Getting Warmer, Virtual, Transit, Bicycle, or Uber. If the address matches exactly, you will hear a summary of the route beginning with which direction to start heading. If the address is not an exact match, Indigo will prompt you with the address it found. Make sure the address displayed is exactly what you want like Street verses Drive verses Lane. Once you select the address, you will progress to the route loaded screen where you will hear a summary of how to begin the route. 

Caution! If you use dictation to enter POI or address text, be careful what text actually is inserted in the fields. For example, if you use the words, 22 11 Bush Street, thinking you would be inserting the 4 numbers 2211, you end up with number 20 on 11th street. It is the ambiguities that give dictation a problem. Be very precise and very literal if you are using dictation. Stating a location name such as "Starbucks" is not as ambiguous  and should not be a problem with dictation.

4. Contact Address - Select this button to create a route to an address in your Contacts database. Simply select the Contact that you want to be routed to and then choose your route type; Walking, Driving, Getting Warmer, Virtual, Transit, Bicycle, or Uber if available. Note that you can only create a route to the first address listed with this contact. If you have multiple addresses for a contact (i.e. home, work, etc.) only the first one will be used.

5. Waypoint Route - Waypoint (also called breadcrumb) routes can be created in areas with maps in a situation when you do not want to use the automatically created route. More often, waypoint routes are most useful when you are somewhere where maps are not available - perhaps on a university campus, hiking trail, park, large parking lot, or campground. To begin recording a new waypoint route, go to the Routs tab, choose Waypoint Route from the list, select Record New Waypoint Route button. You will be prompted to enter the name of the first waypoint. The nearest address is automatically placed in the text field, but you can enter your own name. For example, if you are creating a route from your car to the end of a hiking trail, you could name the first waypoint "car" and your last waypoint "trail end." When the waypoint route is saved, it will automatically be named "car to trail end." Once the first waypoint is saved, you can travel your route while waypoints are automatically placed at regular intervals as you walk along your route (every 160 feet at pedestrian speeds and every half mile at vehicle speeds). You can also add your own waypoints manually by either shaking the phone or selecting the Add Waypoint button at the bottom of the screen. If you add Waypoints by shaking the phone the nearest address or intersection, if available, will be added to the name of that Waypoint. If you add Waypoints using the Add Waypoint button, you have the option to either accept the auto-populated text or enter your own text and select the Save button. This waypoint will be added sequentially to the list of waypoints in your route. When you exit your route by selecting the Back button, it is automatically closed and saved using the name of the 1st and last waypoint. Note: Make sure you are done adding waypoints to your route when you select the Back button because it is not yet possible to add to a waypoint route once you exit. To hear about your location without leaving your route, select the Location Announce button in the upper right corner of the screen.
To load an existing route again, select the Load Existing Waypoint Route button. A list of all your previously created waypoint routes will be presented. Simply select the route you want to load. When your route loads, it will automatically place you at the nearest Waypoint and determine which way to load the route. So, if you are at the last Waypoint in your route, it will load the route in reverse order, so Waypoint 1 is your destination. While in the route, you will hear automatic direction and distance announcements about your next Waypoint. 
To delete a waypoint route, perform a one-finger double tap, hold, and release on the route that you want to delete. You will be prompted to press OK if you want to delete.
To edit or delete a waypoint within a route, select it from the list of waypoints with a one-finger double tap. To edit the name of the waypoint, input the desired waypoint name into the text field, then select the Save button. To delete the waypoint, select the Delete button.

6. History - Once you have created a route, the last 25 destinations you have created will be listed so you can quickly initiate another route to that location. If you wish to have a destination ready to go, create a route and then close the route. That destination will then be available on the History list when you want to initiate the route.
Route loaded screen
Once you have chosen your destination and selected a route type, the route loaded screen will load. Initially the route loaded screen will announce various bits of information. So, for example, if you created a route to the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco using the address of 950 Mason Street, when your route loads you will hear:
"X miles to destination, estimated time X hours/minutes, facing direction is north, proceed straight, start going west on current street, in X feet, turn on next street." The route instructions will automatically trigger as you approach the turning points.
If you would like to navigate the Route loaded screen, you can swipe through the different items on the screen. For example, you will find the route name ("Route to 950 Mason Street, San Francisco, CA") followed by the Aira launch  button  and the LookAround Wand button at the top right. As you continue to swipe through the screen you will find:
1. First turn into your loaded route
2. Route Details button - select this button if you would like to hear a list of all the route turns.
3. Cancel button- select this button if you would like to cancel your route.
4. Recalculate Route button- select this button if you would like to recalculate your route.
5. Distance to your destination
6. Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) or the number of minutes to your destination, and 
7. Repeat button, which will repeat the route information summary. 

If you have chosen the Getting Warmer or Waypoint route type, you will not hear any route directions, instead you will hear "Proceed to Clock-face direction, Compass heading, X distance to your destination. This information will repeat every minute when you are over 1000 feet from your destination, every 30 seconds when you are 500-1000 feet from your destination and every 15 seconds when you are within 500 feet of your destination. The Getting Warmer auto announcement will be every 5 minutes over 5 miles from your destination no matter the speed at which you are moving. 

Magic Tap Gesture

As you may already know, while using Voiceover, you can perform a two-finger double tap gesture, which activates different functions depending on what app you are in, and where you are in that app. This gesture is called the Magic Tap gesture. In Indigo, while you are traveling on a route, you can use this gesture to repeat the route instruction which was last spoken. To perform this gesture, simply tap twice with two fingers, anywhere on the screen, and the app will repeat the last route instruction for you. You may use this gesture at any time while you are traveling on a route.

TIP: When performing the Magic Tap gesture, remember to keep your two fingers apart just a bit. It will not work to interrupt the voice.

Route Shake Feature
While you are on the Route Loaded Screen, if you shake your phone, you will hear the distance, street name and direction of the next turn, distance and direction of destination, and Estimated Time of Arrival, or ETA. You will not hear the next intersection announcements, available on the Location screen. The Shake activation is designed to operate when you are holding the phone roughly upright. The Shake should not trigger when the phone is upside down. The shake is intended to be conducted roughly in a vertical to horizontal orientation. Experiment to learn how to activate the shake function and how to keep it from triggering in your pocket, purse or on a belt. A vibration and bell sound will indicate Shake is in process. Adjustments between Shake Off, Medium or Hard are under settings, General. 

Getting Warmer
On the Getting Warmer Screen, you will hear distance to your destination, the direction to your destination, Estimated Time of Arrival, and a Cancel Button. Select Cancel to exit the route and return to the Route Creation Screen. 
If you have chosen one of the route modes with turns, the Getting Warmer function takes over once you are near your destination just in case it is a sizable distance off the street. Once you have arrived within the default arrival distance of 50 feet, the program will automatically turn on the Getting Warmer mode which will run up to two minutes before it closes. While in this mode, you will hear the distance and compass direction to your destination every 15 seconds.
In summary, Getting Warmer on its own provides distance and direction to a destination without turns. It is also used when a route with turns ends short of the destination, so you have some indication of where that destination is located in the final distance to the destination, for example, in a large parking lot.
Note that the ETA, when Getting Warmer is selected, is based on either your speed at the time of the reading or a default speed if not moving. For example, 2.5 miles per hour assuming you are walking. The estimate does not include the extra time of stop lights at intersections, time for getting lost or time stopping to chat.

Create a Route using Blind Square
To provide another route creation option, we have partnered with Blind Square so that you can perform your POI search in Blind Square and then transition directly into route creation in the Indigo app.
To create a route from the Blind Square app, search as you normally would using Blind Square to determine your destination point of interest. Once you select a point of interest, you will go to the details page. Swipe until you reach Plan a Route, double tap to select this option. The Select Navigation app screen will offer several external routing apps including Indigo. Select Indigo and you will hear "POI Name is selected as a destination, starting navigation application Indigo." You will then be prompted to select a route type, Walking, Driving, Getting Warmer, Virtual, Transit or Bicycle.

Location/Where Am I?
The Location screen gives you a list of your location details. Along the top of the screen, you will find the Launch Aira button and the LookAround Wand button. In the main screen, the following items are listed:
Near - announces the nearest address to your current location.
Heading - If you are moving, this announces your current heading in degrees and compass direction based on your movement.
Direction - If you are stationary, this announces the direction you are facing in degrees and compass direction based on which way your phone is facing.
Intersection Ahead - announces the street name and direction of the intersection ahead of your current location.
Nearest POI - announces the nearest POI
Virtual - announces the distance and direction to the last virtual position you set. This position is remembered when you leave and reenter Indigo. 

Info button allows you to access the following information: 
Location Accuracy - announces the approximate position accuracy in the number of feet, yards or meters, as you wish. Accuracy can vary from a few feet in the open to hundreds of feet if you are inside a building or among tall buildings. 
Altitude - announces your approximate Altitude in feet, meters, or yards. Under 100 feet, it will say "Sea Level."
When a route is loaded the Location Screen will also display and announce your next turn, direction to your destination and the Estimated Arrival. This is the result of the current plus the number of minutes to your destination based on the speeds associated with each road in your route. For example, if you have created a route that will take 15 minutes, and it is now 12:30PM. The estimated arrival will be 12:45PM. Note that on the Route screen, the Estimated Time of Arrival, ETA, will only be the amount of time of the route and not the time on the clock for your arrival.
GPS Speed - announces the tracked speed of your movement. While you are standing still, this announcement should not report anything, but if the GPS accuracy is poor, it might report a speed while you are standing still.
Location Shake Feature
A firm shake of your device will refresh the Location information and announce the items on the screen including the nearest intersection. You will hear a ding and vibration indicating this update is in process. The Shake activation is designed to operate when you are holding the phone roughly upright. The Shake should not trigger when the phone is upside down.

Points of Interest (POIs) 
POI Search
The Points of Interest (POIs) screen allows you to search for:
1. A nearby POI - If you do not know the exact name of the POI you want to find or just want to know what is around, use this search. To do a nearby POI search:
a. If you are on the POI Search screen, you can use the Shake Feature. Simply shake the phone firmly and you will go directly to the Nearby POI List screen.
b. if you are on any other screen, perform the Nearby POI List Shortcut Gesture by navigating to the POI Tab button, once you hear "POIs Tab," you can perform a one-finger double tap, hold and release. You will go directly to a list of all POIs nearby, no matter the category . 
2. A specific POI, e.g. "UPS Store" - To do this search double tap on the text field, then use the keyboard on the bottom portion of the screen to type in the text of the POI you want to find and select Search. If you enter the text, a Clear Text button will appear next to the text field. Use this to quickly erase the text if need be.
3. A nearby POI in a specific category, e.g. Food, Lodging, etc. - If you want to search for a POI within a specific category, scroll down the page to the list of Categories. Select one of the categories listed. Then a list of nearby POIs from the category you have selected will be displayed. We have enabled food menu viewing for Foursquare restaurants. To see if the restaurant you are going to has a menu available, perform a Food category search. When the POI details screen loads, there will be a link to the menu if there is one available.
4. A specific POI in a specific category, e.g. "Mel's Diner" in Food - select one of the categories listed, then when that screen loads, open the text field   and type the text you wish to search. Nearby POIs in that category are listed just below the search field. 
5. Transit Near Me will generate a list of transit stops in your vicinity. If you wish to navigate to that transit stop, click on it and a Walking route will be created to the stop. 
6. Create a User POI based on the GPS position where you are located. You can name, categorize, and even share it. You can even find points inside airports and malls, which you can somewhat navigate to with marginal indoor GPS position accuracy.  

Since some Foursquare points are created by users, you will run across some questionable points along with mostly good ones. Use the Action list to suggest removal or flagging of a questionable POI. You can send feedback either by flicking on the POI name or by finding the option under the Choose Mode list. You must choose a reason for removing the POI; you can optionally add a text explanation. Then hit submit.

POI Action Buttons
After searching for a POI, you will be presented with a list of matching POIs from which to choose. If there is no match, you will be presented with the choice of expanding the distance of your search or cancelling your search. Once you select the correct POI from the list, the Route creation screen will load. The POI address, phone and distance will be listed along with up to ten options: 
1. The Walk Button will create a pedestrian route to the POI.
2. The Drive Button will create a vehicular route to the POI.
3. The Getting Warmer button will provide Getting Warmer (also known as line of sight) distance and direction to the POI.
4. The Virtual Button will set the POI to a virtual position. Subsequent POI searches will be relative to that Virtual position until you switch back to GPS position in the top right of the screen. 
5. The Transit button will create a combined Walking and Transit route. 
6. The Bicycle button will create a Bicycle route to the POI. 
7. The Uber button will launch Uber if you have it installed on your phone. You can then request an Uber ride to the POI, which populates the Uber Destination field.
8. Send Feedback provides options to remove or flag the POI. 
9. The Call Button will call the highlighted phone number if there is one. You will be asked to confirm that you want to place the call, select Yes to place the call. Note: This button will not appear if the phone number is not available or if you are running the app on an iPad.
10. A Menu button for food will appear if the restaurant POI has one.

POI Shake Feature
While you are on the POI Search results screen, if you shake your phone, you will hear a list of nearby POIs. The Shake activation is designed to operate when you are holding the phone roughly upright. The Shake should not trigger when the phone is upside down like in your pocket. A ding and vibration will indicate that a query for nearby POIs is in process. 
User POIs
It is very helpful to create your own user Points of Interest. Your user point at the front door of a building can be more accurate than the general address for that building. You can customize the information for these POIs by providing the name, category and tag to make this POI as detailed and relevant as you need it to be.
The User POIs are automatically sorted by proximity along with the commercial POIs when you use the POI Find commands. In order to differentiate between commercial POIs and User POIs when they automatically trigger, we have added a crackling sound preceding the User POI announcement of its category, tag and name. 

Adding User POIs
To add a User POI, go to the relevant location, try to be in clear view of satellites for several seconds. Choose the User POI button and then the Add button. First input the Name of the POI. Then select an appropriate category, the default is User, but you can also choose from Hotel/Accommodation, Pedestrian, Restaurant, Shops and Services, Travel, Transportation & Entertainment or Undefined. Then you can select a Tag (e.g. Door Main, Driveway, House, Bench, Door Alternate, Automatic, Inset, Revolving, Elevator, etc.) You can choose to create your own tag to add further information about the User POI. Note that the most popular categories are at the top of the list and the others are alphabetical afterwards. Since not all of these will fit on the screen, you will need to scroll down to expose the lower part of the category list.
Same with the Tag list, which defaults on Door Main. Press the Save button when finished. Note that the GPS location of your point will be established when you press Add before filling in the fields and not when you press Save at the end.
Shortcut Gesture to Add User POIs
You can go directly from the Location Screen to the Record User POI name field. Perform a one-finger double tap and hold on the Location screen other than on the Menu tab buttons. You can now fill in the name, category and tags for a User POI.
Editing or Deleting User POIs
You can subsequently edit a User POI by choosing it and changing the fields accordingly. There is no need to press safe again. There is also a Delete button within the User POI details.

Sharing User POIs
There are two Sharing options, share all your User POIs or share a specific User POI. To share all User POIS, select the sharing button from the User POIs list screen, this will export all of your user points. To share a specific User POI, go to that User POI details, the sharing button will share only that point, not the whole list. When you select the Sharing button, you have two options to export your points. One is Airdrop and the other is Email. It is a good idea to email the points to yourself as a back-up, especially after you have created a lot of User POIs. You may also want to email your user points to another user.
To import User points, click on the attachment from your phone's email. It will have a .SENX extension. You will be presented with several sharing buttons. Choose the button with the name of the app you wish to import the user points into, i.e. Indigo. When you choose it, the app will open, and the points are imported and merged with any new points you might have created. If there are points with exactly the same position and name, the duplicate will be deleted.

You must have a registered account in order to have User points of interest. You do this from Settings if you didn't do it when initially installing the app. You cannot add User points without a registered account. If for some reason a User POI category does not show up in the POI category list, try logging out and back in again.

Make sure before updating the app that you have emailed your User POIs to yourself in case they are erased during the update. Then you can click on the attachment within your phone's email client to copy them into the app.

Settings 
There are seven buttons within the Settings Menu. They are: Background Operation, General, Routing, LookAround, Speech, Visual Map, About and Log Out. 
Background Operation, On/Off 
The default is On. When Background Operation is On, routes and other announcements will remain active when you exit the app or lock the phone. The status of this selection will remain the same until you change it. You will hear verbal announcements in the background but no haptics. The Shake feature does not function in the background. If you have Background Operation on, remember to use the App Switcher to close the app when not using it, as all GPS apps can drain your phone's battery when in constant use.  Another benefit of not having the focus on Indigo is that you will not accidentally trigger the app if it is locked and in the background.

Automatic announcements work in the background when you leave the app or lock the screen with the following limitations.

You can lock the screen by pressing the power button momentarily. Be aware that if it isn't talking or playing alerts, you may forget it is in the background and it will continue to drain the battery. If you don't want the app to run in the background, either go to the app's Settings and turn off the Background Operation or use the App Switcher to Close the app.

Do not rely on Indigo(tm) if you are in a call. Normally, most sounds and verbal prompts should work properly when in the background. Phone calls or other events may interfere. You can make a phone call with Siri or receive a phone call and still hear the app's prompts. However, it may lag behind or miss the occasional prompt. Do not rely on Indigo if you are in a call. If you are walking, it isn't safe to multitask .

The app's built-in Wav prompts like Continue Straight and Arrived at Destination augment route instructions. 

General Settings 
Contains the following items:
* Units: Choose from Feet, Meters or Yards. You will hear "Selected, Feet button" if that is the one chosen. To change this, navigate to your preferred units and select.

* Home Address: Enter your home address here to save time when you want to be routed home. Select the Set button and you can choose between Type Address, Current Position or Select from Contacts.

* Shake: The Shake Feature is active on the Location screen, Route Loaded screen and POI Results Screen. You can choose either Off, Medium or Hard. Under this selection, you will hear "Shake Medium", which is the default. If you find that the Shake feature is activating too much, you can select the Hard setting. To deactivate Shake throughout the application, select Shake, Off.

* Low Vision: The Low Vision options offer three choices for background and text themes, Black/White, White/Black, and Yellow/Black. Black/White, or Black text on a white background is the default, so when you navigate through the choices, you will hear "Selected, Black/White, 1 of 3." To change this, navigate to your preferred Low Vision settings and select.

* Notifications: Enable Aira Access notifications means that when you are in the vicinity of an Aira Access Point, the app will notify you. The default is ON. 

Announce GoodMaps indoor venue notifications, toggle On or Off

Routing Settings 
Indigo (tm)'s Routing Settings contain the following features:

* Send Indigo App Log Button: If you encounter a problem in the app, use this feature to send your recent logs to the development team. You do not have to be on a route for these logs to capture data. There is a text box where you can specify the problem you are reporting. Once you press the Done button, wait a few seconds to hear a prompt indicating the logs were uploaded successfully. If they don't go through, make sure you have a good network connection and try sending them again. 

* Auto Repeat: The default for this toggle is on. An Auto Repeat function helps to ensure that you hear important information automatically. This applies to the next turn and destination information. As you get closer to your destination, the turning announcements automatically repeat more frequently based on the same parameters as the Getting Warmer function. This is every 15 seconds under 500 feet, every 30 seconds from 500 to 1,000 feet, every minute from 1,000 feet to 5 miles and every 5 minutes beyond 5 miles. The destination information is also repeated under 1,000 feet. 

* Vibration Alerts: When the vibration alerts are on (the default setting), you will receive a vibration along with the audio alert for "Turn now" and "arrived at destination." 

* Arrival Distance: Choose from the default 50 feet, 75 feet or 100 feet. This distance controls how far away from turns, intersections and your destination that these items will be announced. Be careful when expanding this trigger beyond the default 50 feet. When you navigate through the choices, you will hear "Selected, 50 feet button, 1 of 3." If you have chosen your Units to announce in meters, your choices will be 15 meters, 25 meters or 30 meters. If you have chosen your Units to announce in yards, your choices will be 15 yards, 25 yards or 35 yards.

* Route Avoidances: Select the following items if you would like to avoid them on your routes: Highways and Toll Road. As you navigate through the various items from this list you will hear the item and whether or not it is selected. If you hear there is an accident on the highway for example, it can be handy to force the route to avoid the highway and to force the route to use local or frontage roads. Remember to change this back once you are finished.

* Direction to POI: Choose from Clock Face & Right/Left, Clock Face, or Right/Left. The combination of Clock Face & Right/Left is the default. This setting allows you to choose how your directions are announced, e.g. POI is at 12 O'clock, or POI is Ahead.

Look Around Settings 
Indigo (tm)'s LookAround Settings contain the following features:

* Intersection Level: Choose between Simple or Full detail. Full is the default, so when you navigate through the choices, you will hear "Selected, Full button." Simple describes an intersection by the street names without their orientation. Full will give you the clock face or left/right directions of the intersecting streets.

* LookAround Update Interval: 10 Seconds is the default and the lowest interval you can select. If you would like to change the number of seconds between POI searches, select the "update interval slider, adjustable" button, and swipe upwards to increase or downwards to decrease. When increasing the interval, each upwards swipe will increase the interval by 4-5 seconds, i.e. 19 seconds, 24 seconds, 28 seconds, 33 seconds, etc. You can increase the interval up to 60 seconds.

* LookAround Configuration allows you to set the movement speed at which you want to trigger your LookAround announcements: 
Points of Interest: By default, the POI announcements will trigger when you are travelling under 15 MPH. 
o Intersections: By default, the Intersection announcements will trigger when you are travelling Under 40 MPH. 
o Beta: Street Change: By default, the street name change announcements are set to Never. The other option for this announcement is Under 5 MPH. This feature is still in Beta and may not always announce the correct street, the announcement becomes unreliable at higher speeds.
o Heading Change: By default, the heading change announcements will trigger when you are travelling Under 15 MPH.
If you would like to change either of these settings, say you want to turn the announcements off or perhaps you want POIs or intersections to announce when travelling at higher speeds you can change this setting. The options are Under 15 MPH, under 40 MPH, Always Announce or Never. If you have chosen your Units to announce in meters, your choices will be Under 25 KM/H, under 80 KM/H, Always Announce or Never. Note that if you are in a highly populated area with lots of POIs and close intersections, increasing these announcements might result in constant announcements and overall sluggishness of the program.

* LookAround Wand - This feature, which works only when you are stationary, allows you to include intersections in your LookAround information. Intersections default On.

Visual Map
The Map button under the Settings menu will load a visual map of your current location, with a blue dot, marking your current location. Since this is a visual image, Voiceover will only announce the buttons and heading on the screen, Back button, LookAround Wand, Map Heading, and the Repeat button. With Voiceover turned off, you can use the standard scroll, zoom in and out touch screen gestures.

Siri Configuration
There are three default Siri shortcuts under Settings where you can edit the Siri prompt. Give the following Siri prompt and then you are asked two questions. "Create a route using Indigo." Where do you want to go? Provide the address or POI name. When found, Siri will say, "by which mode do you want to go?" Answer Walk or Drive. The route should then be created. If the address is not found, you will land in a search box, which might have the POI in it. If so, choose that and continue.
  
Speech

This is where you can choose and adjust the background voice for the Indigo announcements. Click on the chosen voice and language to find a list of other languages and voices. The chosen voice will be displayed followed by the adjustments for that voice. If you wish to choose a different voice, click on the name and scroll through the list to choose a different default voice. The voices are organized by language. You can press the Play Button to hear what the voice sounds like and then select the voice name to activate it. The Play button to sample the voice is before it. 
 
About Settings 
Contains seven items, the Application version number, a link to the Indigo(tm) Nav information, a link to APH Privacy statement, Partners and Credits, POI Provider, Map Provider and Help.

Indigo(tm) General Notes

Battery Consumption
As with any GPS application, the phone's battery will drain significantly when the GPS app is active. If you are using Bluetooth headphones and have Wi-Fi also on, the battery drains even more, as much as 30 percent per hour. This may be less with the app in the background and the screen locked. The best solution is to always have an auxiliary battery with you. 

Using an external GPS receiver may reduce the phone's battery consumption slightly as well as improving position accuracy. Bluetooth must of course be on in order to connect to an external receiver. Check to make sure an external receiver is compatible; not all are.

Note also if you are using a Bluetooth headset, Voiceover will sometimes cut off the first bit of a word. It is not the program that is cutting out, it is the Bluetooth headset not reacting quickly enough when audio is sent to it after a period of silence. The first syllable of an announcement may be clipped when the Bluetooth headset wakes up. ** There is an option in the iPhone Accessibility Settings under Hearing to generate a silent pulse to eliminate this problem. This setting currently times-out after about a minute. 

Interrupting the App
If you make a phone call while Indigo(tm) is running, you may need to tap on the app again after the call is over. If you receive a call, the Indigo app should resume when you disconnect. If you had a route running, it should pick up again where you are now located after 10 seconds or so depending on the position acquisition.

Haptics list

Note that Indigo(tm) uses Morse code patterns for the vibrations when possible.

* LookAround Wand
o North, Short/long (Morse Code, N)
o East, Short (Morse Code, E)
o South, Short/short/short (Morse Code, S)
o West, Short/long/long (Morse Code, W) 

Note that Indigo(tm) will indicate an approaching turn by one sequence of the pattern, whereas the actual turn will repeat the pattern three times to correspond with the audio cues.

* Turning Haptics

o Left Turn, Short/short/short/short (Morse Code, h)
o Right, Long/long/long (Morse Code, O)
o Continue Straight, Long/short/long/short (Morse Code, C)



Position Accuracy
Indigo(tm) app announces location accuracy on the Location screen, like 33 feet or 16 feet, etc. This is a rough estimate. The position on a mobile phone is a combination of GPS, cell towers and Wi-Fi. Many apps just call it GPS position but in fact it is a combination of these factors. Audio alerts will occur when you lose and gain GPS positioning. Note, you can get a position inside an airport where GPS signals are poor, and Foursquare POIs can be found and navigated to with the Getting Warmer method but the accuracy may be 100 feet or more.

Address and POI accuracy can vary a lot as well. Four square points are quite prolific and often right at the door of a business, but you do have to put up with some junk points users have recorded incorrectly. You can request to remove those points with the Send Feedback option.

Address matching can be precise or sometimes hundreds of feet off. For example, an outdoor mall may have one common address for all the businesses when in fact individual stores may be deep in a parking lot and away from the actual street address. Foursquare points may help in this matter as opposed to routing to the street number. It is wise to always be skeptical when it comes to the last 50 feet or so of any route. This is where access to a live visual agent can be the most efficient way to find an entrance of a building, specific store in a shopping mall, etc.

Note that the side of the street in a route may sometimes be indicated and other times not. At the last turn in a route, Indigo will not tell you to cross the street if your destination is on the opposite side of the last street. For example, Indigo may say turn left, destination is on the right. In fact, you need to cross before you make the left in order to be on the right side of the street. Same with the right turn. Cross first before turning right. If the side of the street is not given, use getting warmer to figure that out once you are close. 

IOS voices

There are two separate voices in iOS: The Primary voice is the one you hear for most applications. Those voices can be found by going to Settings, Accessibility, Vision, Voiceover and Speech.

Indigo uses a background voice for announcements. You may want to choose a different background voice to more easily distinguish it from the Primary voice. One could be Allison and the other Alex. Most Indigo announcements will be using the background Spoken Content voice. You can make these voice adjustments under Settings, Speech.

  Audio Events

There are a number of audio events that augment Voiceover in the Indigo app. If you have your mute button switched on, no app sound effects, i.e. Continue Straight, Blinker Turn, LookAround Wand, route recalculation, background timer, chime, etc., will be played.  Also since these are "Alert Sounds" the volume of this is adjustable in your main system's Sounds settings page which is "Ringer and Alerts."  So, if you go into your sounds setting's page and increase the ringer and Alert's volume, the sound effects will also be played louder. 

Here is a list of audio cues: (Your phone must not be in silent mode to hear them. Make sure sounds are not muted).
* Chimes audio logo when loading the app.
* Two-tone beep near LookAround Intersections plus the speech announcement of the street names.
* Trill tone within 250 feet or so when approaching a turn and announcement of the turn.
* Sound of a car blinker and vibration when it is time to turn followed by the turning announcement. You get the same turning indications if the street name changes but you are continuing straight.  
* Ding sound when recalculating a route.
* Ding sound and vibration for Shake queries.
* Continue Straight human voice after completing a turn and in line with a subsequent turn.
* Arrived at destination human voice and vibration when within the arrival distance.
* Drip sound when GPS signal is lost or poor, meaning it will occur when accuracy is worse than 15 meters / 30 feet and will regain better than 15 meters / 30 feet.
* Trill tone for GPS position acquired.
* Crackle sound indicating a User POI.

Contact APH 

** There are many ways to stay in touch, get help and be informed about the Indigo app:
1. Visit: www.APH.org/
2. Send an e-mail tosupport@APH.org
3. Follow @APH on X/twitter. 
4. Like APH on Facebook www.facebook.org/APH.io 

