WCAG 2.0 Pre-Verification Checklist


Syracuse University | Technology Accessibility

             

WCAG 2.0 PRE-VERIFICATION CHECKLIST

 

This checklist has been adapted from WebAIM’s WCAG 2.0 Checklist for HTML Documents and is intended only as a preliminary step in the compliance verification process. Please be sure that you have addressed these common accessibility issues prior to submitting your site for review. 

GENERAL

 The web page has a descriptive title.

 A visible ‘Skip to Content’ or ‘Skip Navigation’ link is present.

 Multiple ways are available to find other web pages on the site - at least two of the following: a list of related pages, table of contents, site map, site search.

 Page is usable when text size is increased to 200%. Horizontal scrolling is enabled when magnified.

 Headings are used and nested appropriately

KEYBOARD NAVIGATION

 Keyboard focus is clearly visible.

 The keyboard navigation order of links, form elements, etc. is logical and intuitive.

 All page functionality is available using the keyboard, unless the functionality cannot be accomplished in any known way using a keyboard (e.g., free hand drawing).  Keyboard focus is never locked or trapped at one particular page element.

LINKS

 The purpose of each link can be determined from the link text alone.

 There are no links (or form image buttons) with the same text that go to different locations.

 Color alone is not used to distinguish links from surrounding text unless the luminance contrast between the link and the surrounding text is at least 3:1 and an additional differentiation (e.g., it becomes underlined) is provided when the link is hovered over or receives focus.

IMAGES

 All images, form image buttons, and image map hot spots have appropriate, equivalent alternative text.

                                                                                                                         itsaccessibility.syr.edu

Syracuse University | Technology Accessibility

             

  Images that do not convey content, are decorative, or contain content that is already conveyed in text are given null alt text (alt="") or implemented as CSS backgrounds  Equivalent alternatives to complex images are provided in context or on a separate (linked and/or referenced via longdesc) page.

FORMS

 Sufficient labels, cues, and instructions for required interactive elements are provided via instructions, examples, properly positioned form labels, and/or fieldsets/legends.

  If an input error is detected, provide suggestions for fixing the input in a timely and accessible manner.

 Form inputs have associated text labels.

 Form buttons have a descriptive value.

 If the user can submit information, the submission is reversible, verified, or confirmed.

TABLES

 Tables are not used for layout.

 Data tables do not have irregular structure (merged row or column cells)  Data tables have properly assigned row/column headers. 

AUDIOVISUAL CONTENT

 Synchronized captions are provided for all video

 Video controls can be operated with keyboard only

 Automatically updating content (news ticker, carousel, notification alert, etc.) can be paused, stopped, or hidden by the user or the user can manually control the timing of the updates.

LINKED DOCUMENTS (WORD, PDF, PPT, ETC.)

 All linked documents (Word, PDF, PowerPoint, Excel, etc.) are accessible.

 The correct file type has been added to the link text, such as [Word] or [PDF].

 

                                                                                                                         itsaccessibility.syr.edu
