






WCAG was created by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the W3C, the World Wide Web Consortium, which is a global community of accessibility experts striving to make the internet as inclusive as possible. WCAG provides a single, common, global standard for web accessibility, enabling authors, designers, and developers to avoid, and fix, barriers that users with disabilities may encounter online. Importantly, following WCAG also helps organizations comply with various legal mandates, like the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act (AODA), the European Accessibility Act, and others. In some cases, to comply with legal requirements, web content must conform with WCAG standards.
So how well does your web content, website, or application conform with WCAG?
This practical guide explains the different WCAG principles, versions, and conformance levels, and how to test for WCAG conformance. It also includes an interactive WCAG checklist to help you evaluate your current state of accessibility.



Comparing WCAG versions
WCAG exists in various versions: 1.0, 2.0, 2.1, and 2.2. Updated versions are released to keep pace with changes in technology. The first version, known as WCAG 1.0, was released in 1999 and is no longer recommended for use. A later version, WCAG 2.0, came out in 2008. In 2018, the W3C released WCAG 2.1, which builds upon the guidelines in 2.0, introducing additional success criteria related to newer technologies, and addressing a broader range of disability-related needs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The latest version, WCAG 2.2, was released in 2023. The various versions of WCAG are backwards compatible, meaning the more recent version incorporates the success criteria from the earlier version, with additions. Therefore, if content conforms with WCAG 2.2, it also conforms with WCAG 2.1, and so on. 

What's new in WCAG 2.2?
WCAG 2.2 builds on the improvements in WCAG 2.1, further enhancing accessibility for web users with low vision, cognitive and learning disabilities, and motor disabilities, including support for the use of touch-screen devices. This release was also the first version of WCAG which eliminated a success criterion that was introduced in WCAG 2.0: Success Criterion 4.1.1 Parsing.
This criterion was determined to be unnecessary in later versions because almost all modern assistive technologies and browsers automatically solve for the issues it was meant to prevent. The W3C has made amendments to older versions of WCAG to ensure that digital experiences conforming with WCAG 2.2, which omits the 4.1.1 criterion, will still be conformant and backwards compatible with the earlier WCAG 2.1 and 2.0.
Level A                                                           Level AA                                                          Level AAA

This level represents the minimum level of conformance. Level A criteria affect the broadest group of users with the most benefits and are essential. But, with the base level of support, some barriers will still exist that impact certain groups of users.

This level is the most common target conformance level, often adopted in regulations or negotiated in legal settlements. The criteria at this level establish a higher level of accessibility that works for more users, including those who use assistive technology.
This is the highest conformance level achievable, meaning it covers the success criteria of all three levels. However, Level AAA is not applicable or realistic in all situations, as all criteria may not apply to every digital experience. Most organizations will target Level AA conformance, but some may choose to additionally adopt specific criteria at the AAA level.

   Success criteria  LevelWCAG 2.0WCAG 2.1WCAG 2.2Total (all versions)AMinimum accessibility255232AAMore accessible137424AAAEven more accessible 
(not applicable to all experiences)235331 Total6117986**Includes the removal of one WCAG 2.0 success criterion, which is now obsolete.
How high should you aim?

The W3C encourages organizations to conform with the most recent version of WCAG as a best practice. While certain laws, such as the Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act (AODA) and Section 508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act of 1973, require conformance with WCAG 2.0 Level AA (which also requires conforming with the 2.0 Level A success criteria), the U.S. Department of Justice has referenced WCAG 2.1 Level AA (at minimum) as the benchmark in its more recent ADA enforcement actions. Amidst this inconsistency, conformance with the latest version, WCAG 2.2, will not only provide improved accessibility for every user, it will ensure your organization is up-to-date in its compliance efforts, especially as we anticipate future policy changes and updated legal rulemaking. Accessibility laws generally mandate conformance with Level A and AA success criteria because all of the technical standards in Level AAA may not be applicable or realistic in all situations.




Start testing
Option 1: Ad-hoc approach
In an ad-hoc approach, specific teams connected to the web, software, or product development life cycle will usually choose tools that support their work and integrate automated testing in their own workflows, perhaps sharing data and results with other teams, perhaps not. If choosing this approach, we recommend you determine which tools will work with your firewall settings, as well as for your design and developer teams. Quality assurance (QA) teams will likely need to leverage even more tools to ensure compliance and usability. Consider the following list of common automated testing tools as you get started.To gauge WCAG conformance, first conduct an evaluation of your website or web content. This evaluation can consist of the step-by-step process of thoroughly and diligently testing whether that experience is usable by people with disabilities. A comprehensive accessibility evaluation typically involves a combination of automated testing and extensive manual evaluation.

Automated testing
Automated testing (or scanning) is a great first step in the testing process. Organizations will differ in how they incorporate automated testing into their workflows. Two common approaches to automated accessibility testing are ad-hoc and integrated.






Manual and functional testing
There are several ways to accomplish manual testing: Option 1
Build an in-house team of accessibility testers to perform QA on digital assets in development.
Option 2
Hire an outside consultant to provide a one-time report outlining issues identified and barriers encountered.
Option 3
Work with an accessibility partner on an ongoing basis. A partner should provide automated testing as well as give you access to an expert team to manually check digital assets using assistive technology. These partners will also work with you to develop prioritization reports outlining the critical, high, medium, and low-level issues; monitor your digital properties on an ongoing basis; validate fixes; and integrate seamlessly into your backend systems for better team collaboration.Manual and functional testing will build upon automated testing results. In this process, accessibility experts, which should include people with disabilities, check website features and key user flows using assistive technology. This evaluation will confirm or dismiss any issues reported in an automated scan, as well as identify any new issues that should be resolved.



Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete1.1.1 - Non-text ContentText alternatives are provided for non-text content.   1.2.1 - Audio-only and Video-only (Pre-recorded)A transcript is provided for audio-only content and a transcript or audio description is provided for video-only content.   1.2.2 - Captions (Pre-recorded)Captions are provided for video with audio.   1.2.3 - Audio Description or Media
Alternative (Pre-recorded)A transcript and / or audio descriptions are provided for video with audio.   1.3.1 - Info and RelationshipsInformation and content relationships implied by formatting are communicated in text or in a way that works with assistive technology.   1.3.2 - Meaningful SequenceThe reading order of content is meaningful, no matter how a user accesses or consumes it.   1.3.3 - Sensory CharacteristicsInstructions rely on more than one sense.   1.4.1 - Use of ColorColor is not the only way used to distinguish an element, convey meaning, indicate an action, or prompt a response.   WCAG Level A checklist (continued)
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete1.4.2 - Audio ControlA mechanism is provided to control audio that plays on page automatically for more than three seconds.   2.1.1 - KeyboardAll functionality is operable using a keyboard (with exceptions).   2.1.2 - No Keyboard TrapThe focus does not get trapped on any element in keyboard-only navigation.   2.1.4 - Character Key ShortcutsNo single-key shortcuts are used, or a way to turn them off or change them is provided.   2.2.1 - Timing AdjustableIf a page has a time limit, users can turn the time limit off, adjust it, or extend it.   2.2.2 - Pause, Stop, HideUser controls are provided for moving or dynamically changing content.   2.3.1 - Three Flashes or BelowNo content flashes more than three times per second, or the flash is below flash thresholds.   2.4.1 - Bypass BlocksWhen blocks of content are repeated on multiple pages, a mechanism is provided to bypass / skip them.   2.4.2 - Page TitledPage titles clearly describe the page topic or page purpose.   2.4.3 - Focus OrderThe tabbing order of the content is meaningful and supports operation.   2.4.4 - Link Purpose (In Context)The purpose of each link can be determined from the link text alone or from the link text and its related context.   2.5.1 - Pointer GesturesA single pointer alternative to complex pointer or touch gestures is provided.   2.5.2 - Pointer CancellationFor functionality that is operated by a single pointer, a way to cancel the pointer input is provided.  WCAG Level A checklist (continued)
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete2.5.3 - Label in NameThe programmatic name contains the text that is presented visually.   2.5.4 - Motion ActuationFor functions that are triggered by moving a device or by gesturing toward a device, an alternative way of triggering the response is provided.   3.1.1 - Language of PageEach page has a human language assigned.   3.2.1 - On FocusInteractive elements receiving focus do not trigger any functionality.   3.2.2 - On InputInteractive elements receiving input do not trigger any functionality.   3.2.6 - Consistent Help Help options provided are consistently available and in the same relative place throughout.   3.3.1 - Error IdentificationWhen input error is detected, the user is notified and the error is described.   3.3.2 - Labels or InstructionsA persistent visible label and / or instructions are provided for elements that require user input.   3.3.7 - Redundant Entry Information that the user has already entered during a process is made available to them.   4.1.1 - ParsingHTML code is clean and well formed in a way that it can be interpreted by browsers and assistive technology. *Note: Criterion 4.1.1 - Parsing, has been removed in version 2.2 and is now considered automatically met for versions 2.1 and 2.0.4.1.2 - Name, Role, ValueAll user interface components communicate their accessibility properties and actions to assistive technology.   WCAG Level AA checklist
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete1.2.4 - Captions (Live)Synchronized captions are provided for live videos containing audio.   1.2.5 - Audio Description (Pre-recorded)If there is important visual content in a video that is not presented in the accompanying audio, an audio description is provided.   1.3.4 - OrientationScreen orientation is not restricted unless the orientation is considered essential.   1.3.5 - Identify Input PurposeFor each form field collecting user information, the purpose of the field is programmatically declared.   1.4.3 - Contrast (Minimum)The contrast ratio between regular-sized, nondecorative text and its background is at least 4.5:1.   1.4.4 - Resize TextText can be resized up to 200% without loss of content or function.   1.4.5 - Images of TextAside from a few specific exceptions, there are no images of text.   1.4.10 - ReflowContent presentation is responsive and doesn't require scrolling in two dimensions.   1.4.11 - Non-Text ContrastThe contrast ratio between non-text elements (including any states) and their background is at least 3:1.   1.4.12 - Text SpacingText spacing can be overridden to improve the reading experience.   1.4.13 - Content on Hover FocusWhen additional content is presented on hover or on focus, the new content is persistent and dismissable.   2.4.5 - Multiple WaysThere is more than one way to reach each page.   WCAG Level AA checklist (continued)
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete2.4.6 - Headings and LabelsHeadings and labels are clear and descriptive.  2.4.7 - Focus VisibleKeyboard focus is clear and visible.  2.4.11 - Focus Not Obscured (Minimum) When an actionable element receives focus, at least a portion of it remains visible.  2.5.7 - Dragging Movements If any part of a website requires a dragging movement, an alternative means of dragging, such as tapping or clicking, is provided.  2.5.8 - Target Size (Minimum) The size of a target is at least 24 by 24 CSS pixels (with exceptions).  3.1.2 - Language of PartsAssistive technology can distinguish and reflect when the human language on a page changes.  3.2.3 - Consistent NavigationNavigational elements are consistently displayed, including their location and the order of their content.  3.2.4 - Consistent IdentificationComponents with the same functionality are consistently identified.  3.3.3 - Error SuggestionUsers receive helpful / specific suggestions when they make errors.  3.3.4 - Error Prevention (Legal, Financial, Data)When users enter financial or legal data, submissions are reversible, and data is checked and confirmed before submission is finalized.  3.3.8 - Accessible Authentication (Minimum) When a cognitive function test is used to authenticate a user, an alternative way to authenticate, or a help mechanism to complete the authentication is provided..  4.1.3 - Status MessagesStatus messages can be presented to the user by assistive technology without receiving focus.  WCAG Level AAA checklist
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete1.2.6 - Sign Language (Pre-recorded)Sign-language interpretation of audio is provided for pre-recorded videos.   1.2.7 - Extended Audio Description 
(Pre-recorded)Videos without sufficient pauses for audio description are extended so that audio descriptions can be added.   1.2.8 - Media Alternative (Pre-recorded)A text alternative, like a descriptive transcript, is provided for all pre-recorded video with audio.   1.2.9 - Audio-only (Live)Live text captioning or a transcript is provided for live audio.   1.3.6 - Identify PurposeThe purpose of elements is programmatically declared by adding semantics or metadata.   1.4.6 - Contrast (Enhanced)The contrast ratio between regular-sized, non-decorative text and its background is at least 7:1.   1.4.7 - Low or No Background AudioAudio contains little to no background noise, or background noise can be turned off.   1.4.8 - Visual PresentationUsers can adjust a range of presentation options.   1.4.9 - Images of Text (No Exception)There are no images of text.   2.1.3 - Keyboard (No Exception)All page functionality is operable using a keyboard (with no exceptions).   2.2.3 - No TimingWith the exception of real-time events, no content requires timed interaction.   2.2.4 - InterruptionsInterruptions can be postponed, suppressed, or configured.   WCAG Level AAA checklist (continued)
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete2.2.5 - Re-authenticatingUser data is saved when re-authenticating.   2.2.6 - TimeoutsUsers are warned when extended inactivity could cause data loss.   2.3.2 - Three FlashesNo content flashes more than three times per second.   2.3.3 - Animation from InteractionsIf an animation is triggered by a user interaction, users can stop the animation.   2.4.8 - LocationUsers can orient themselves within a set of pages.   2.4.9 - Link Purpose (Link Only)Every link's purpose is clear from its text.   2.4.10 - Section HeadingsContent is broken up by section headings.   2.4.12 - Focus Not Obscured (Enhanced) When an actionable element receives focus, the entire component is visible.   2.4.13 - Focus Appearance Focus indicators have sufficient color contrast and are sized to be clearly visible.   2.5.5 - Target SizeThe size of the target for pointer inputs is at least 44 x 44 CSS pixels.   2.5.6 - Concurrent Input MechanismInput is not restricted to a specific modality (like keyboard only or touch only).   3.1.3 - Unusual WordsWords or phrases that are ambiguous or unfamiliar are defined.   WCAG Level AAA checklist (continued)
Success criterionDescriptionPass/FailComplete3.1.4 - AbbreviationsAbbreviations are explained or offered in expanded form close by.  3.1.5 - Reading LevelContent is provided at an eighth grade reading level, or an alternative version at or below an eighth grade reading level is provided.  3.1.6 - PronunciationWords that are hard to pronounce are clarified nearby.  3.2.5 - Change on RequestContent on the page doesn't change unless users initiate it.  3.3.5 - HelpContextual instructions or cues are provided to help users complete and submit forms.  3.3.6 - Error Prevention (All)For any form where a user submits information, the user can reverse, verify, or confirm changes or deletions.  3.3.9 - Accessible Authentication (Enhanced) When a cognitive function test is used to authenticate a user, at least one other authentication method is available which is not a cognitive function test.  


