
Overview
Instructions
Level A criteria
Level AA criteria
Level AAA criteria

Sheet 1: Instructions
Harvard University WCAG 2.1 Vendor Checklist - InstructionsVendors: At a minimum, please complete the entries for the next two tabs of this workbook, i.e.,   · Level A criteria   · Level AA criteriaTo complete the entries, select from the drop-down options found in the Conformance Level column.If the option selected is not 'Supports' or 'Not Applicable', please enter information in theRemarks and Explanations column to explain the option selected.
Sheet 2: Level A criteria
Application Name: Table 1. WCAG 2.1 Guidelines: Level ACriteriaConformance Level Remarks and Explanations1.1.1 Non-text Content (Level A)All images, form image buttons, and image map hot spots have appropriate, equivalent alternative text.Images that do not convey content, are decorative, or with content that is already conveyed in text are given null alt text (alt="") or implemented as CSS backgrounds. All linked images have descriptive alternative text.Equivalent alternatives to complex images are provided in context or on a separate (linked and/or referenced via longdesc) page.Form buttons have a descriptive value.Form inputs have associated text labels.Embedded multimedia is identified via accessible text.Frames are appropriately titled.1.2.1 Audio-only and Video-only (Prerecorded) (Level A)A descriptive text transcript (including all relevant visual and auditory clues and indicators) is provided for non-live, web-based audio (audio podcasts, MP3 files, etc.).A text or audio description is provided for non-live, web-based video-only (e.g., video that has no audio track).1.2.2 Captions (Prerecorded) (Level A)Synchronized captions are provided for non-live, web-based video (YouTube videos, etc.)1.2.3 Audio Description or Media Alternative (Prerecorded) (Level A)A descriptive text transcript OR audio description audio track is provided for non-live, web-based video1.3.1 Info and Relationships (Level A)Semantic markup is used to designate headings (<h1>), lists (<ul>, <ol>, and <dl>), emphasized or special text (<strong>, <code>, <abbr>, <blockquote>, for example), etc. Semantic markup is used appropriately.Tables are used for tabular data. Headings, where necessary, are used to associate data cells with headers. Data table captions and summaries are used where appropriate.Text labels are associated with form input elements. Related form elements are grouped with fieldset/legend.1.3.2 Meaningful Sequence (Level A)The reading and navigation order (determined by code order) is logical and intuitive.1.3.3 Sensory Characteristics (Level A)Instructions do not rely upon shape, size, or visual location (e.g., "Click the square icon to continue" or "Instructions are in the right-hand column").Instructions do not rely upon sound (e.g., "A beeping sound indicates you may continue.").1.4.1 Use of Color (Level A)Color is not used as the sole method of conveying content or distinguishing visual elements.Color alone is not used to distinguish links from surrounding text unless the luminance contrast between the link and the surrounding text is at least 3:1 and an additional differentiation (e.g., it becomes underlined) is provided when the link is hovered over or receives focus.1.4.2 Audio Control (Level A)A mechanism is provided to stop, pause, mute, or adjust volume for audio that automatically plays on a page for more than 3 seconds.2.1.1 Keyboard (Level A)All page functionality is available using the keyboard, unless the functionality cannot be accomplished in any known way using a keyboard (e.g., free hand drawing).Page-specified shortcut keys and access keys (access key should typically be avoided) do not conflict with existing browser and screen reader shortcuts.2.1.2 No Keyboard Trap (Level A)Keyboard focus is never locked or trapped at one particular page element. The user can navigate to and from all navigable page elements.2.1.4 Character Key Shortcuts (Level A)If a keyboard shortcut is implemented using only letter (upper- or lower-case letters), punctuation, number of symbol characters, then at least one of the following is true: 1) mechanism is available to turn shortcut off; 2) mechanism is available to remap the shortcut to one or more non-printable characters (e.g., Ctrl, Alt); 3) the keyboard shortcut for a user interface component is only active when that component has focus.2.2.1 Timing Adjustable (Level A)If a page or application has a time limit, the user is given options to turn off, adjust, or extend that time limit. This is not a requirement for real-time events (e.g., an auction), where the time limit is absolutely required, or if the time limit is longer than 20 hours.2.2.2 Pause, Stop, Hide (Level A)Automatically moving, blinking, or scrolling content that lasts longer than 5 seconds can be paused, stopped, or hidden by the user. Moving, blinking, or scrolling can be used to draw attention to or highlight content as long as it lasts less than 5 seconds.Automatically updating content (e.g., automatically redirecting or refreshing a page, a news ticker, AJAX updated field, a notification alert, etc.) can be paused, stopped, or hidden by the user or the user can manually control the timing of the updates.2.3.1 Three Flashes or Below Threshold (Level A)No page content flashes more than 3 times per second unless that flashing content is sufficiently small and the flashes are of low contrast and do not contain too much red.2.4.1 Bypass Blocks (Level A)A link is provided to skip navigation and other page elements that are repeated across web pages.If a page has a proper heading structure, this may be considered a sufficient technique instead of a "Skip to main content" link. Note that navigating by headings is not yet supported in all browsers.If a page uses frames and the frames are appropriately titled, this is a sufficient technique for bypassing individual frames.2.4.2 Page Titled (Level A)The web page has a descriptive and informative page title.2.4.3 Focus Order (Level A)The navigation order of links, form elements, etc. is logical and intuitive.2.4.4 Link Purpose (In Context) (Level A)The purpose of each link (or form image button or image map hotspot) can be determined from the link text alone, or from the link text and it's context (e.g., surrounding paragraph, list item, table cell, or table headers).Links (or form image buttons) with the same text that go to different locations are readily distinguishable.2.5.1 Pointer Gestures (Level A)All functionality that uses multipoint or path-based gestures for operation can be operated with a single pointer without a path-based gesture, unless a multipoint or path-based gesture is essential.2.5.2 Pointer Cancellation (Level A)For functionality that can be operated using a single pointer, at least one of the following is true: 1) The down-event point is not used to execute any part of the function; 2) Completion of the function is on the up-event, and a mechanism is available to abort the function before completion or to undo the function after completion; 3) The up-event reverses any outcome of the preceding down-event; 4) completing the function on the down-event is essential.2.5.3 Label in Name (Level A)For user interface components with labels that include text or images of text, the name contains the text that is presented visually.2.5.4 Motion Actuation (Level A)Functionality that can be operated by device motion or user motion can also be operated by user interface components; and responding to the motion can be disabled to prevent accidental actuation except when it is a supported interface or is essential to the function.3.1.1 Language of Page (Level A)The language of the page is identified using the HTML lang attribute (<html lang="en">, for example).3.2.1 On Focus (Level A)When a page element receives focus, it does not result in a substantial change to the page, the spawning of a pop-up window, an additional change of keyboard focus, or any other change that could confuse or disorient the user.3.2.2 On Input (Level A)When a user inputs information or interacts with a control, it does not result in a substantial change to the page, the spawning of a pop-up window, an additional change of keyboard focus, or any other change that could confuse or disorient the user unless the user is informed of the change ahead of time.3.3.1 Error Identification (Level A)Required form elements or form elements that require a specific format, value, or length provide this information within the element's label.If utilized, form validation cues and errors (client-side or server-side) alert users to errors in an efficient, intuitive, and accessible manner. The error is clearly identified, quick access to the problematic element is provided, and user is allowed to easily fix the error and resubmit the form.3.3.2 Labels or Instructions (Level A)Sufficient labels, cues, and instructions for required interactive elements are provided via instructions, examples, properly positioned form labels, and/or fieldsets/legends.4.1.1 Parsing (Level A)Significant HTML/XHTML validation/parsing errors are avoided.4.1.2 Name, Role, Value (Level A)Markup is used in a way that facilitates accessibility. This includes following the HTML/XHTML specifications and using forms, form labels, frame titles, etc. appropriately.
Sheet 3: Level AA criteria
Application Name: Table 2. WCAG 2.1 Guidelines: Level AACriteriaConformance Level Remarks and Explanations1.2.4 Captions (Live) (Level AA)Synchronized captions are provided for all live multimedia that contains audio (audio-only broadcasts, web casts, video conferences, Flash animations, etc.)1.2.5 Audio Description (Prerecorded) (Level AA)Audio descriptions are provided for all video content1.3.4 Orientation (Level AA)Content does not restrict its view and operation to a single display orientation, such as portrait or landscape, unless a specific display orientation is essential (i.e., bank check). 1.3.5 Identify Input Purpose (Level AA)Purpose of each input field collecting information about the user can be programmatically determined.1.4.3 Contrast (Minimum) (Level AA)Text and images of text have a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1.Large text (over 18 point or 14 point bold) has a contrast ratio of at least 3:11.4.4 Resize text (Level AA)The page is readable and functional when the text size is doubled.1.4.5 Images of Text (Level AA)If the same visual presentation can be made using text alone, an image is not used to present that text.1.4.10 Reflow (Level AA)Content can be presented without loss of information or functionality and without requiring scrolling in two dimensions.1.4.11 Non-text Contrast (Level AA)The visual presentation of User Interface Components and Graphical Objects have a contrast ratio of at least 3:1 against adjacent color(s).1.4.12 Text Spacing (Level AA)Content implemented using markup languages that support text style properties (line height, or paragraph, letter, and word spacing) can adjust each of these with no loss of content or functionality even if all four are changed.1.4.13 Content on Hover or Focus (Level AA)If content appears on focus/hover (and disappears when focus/hover is removed), three things must occur to ensure content is accessible: 1) The additional content must be dismissable with the keyboard without moving focus/hover - e.g., with use of escape key; 2) The additional content itself must be hoverable, so users that are zoomed in can inspect the additional content; 3) Content must be persistent to allow users to read the content without it disappearing until focus/hover is removed or the user dismisses it.2.4.5 Multiple Ways (Level AA)Multiple ways are available to find other web pages on the site - at least two of: a list of related pages, table of contents, site map, site search, or list of all available web pages.2.4.6 Headings and Labels (Level AA)Page headings and labels for form and interactive controls are informative. Avoid duplicating heading (e.g., "More Details") or label text (e.g., "First Name") unless the structure provides adequate differentiation between them.2.4.7 Focus Visible (Level AA)It is visually apparent which page element has the current keyboard focus (i.e., as you tab through the page, you can see where you are).3.1.2 Language of Parts (Level AA)When appropriate, the language of sections of content that are a different language are identified, for example, by using the lang attribute (<blockquote lang="es")>3.2.3 Consistent Navigation (Level AA)Navigation links that are repeated on web pages do not change order when navigating through the site.3.2.4 Consistent Identification (Level AA)Elements that have the same functionality across multiple web pages are consistently identified. For example, a search box at the top of the site should always be labeled the same way.3.3.3 Error Suggestion (Level AA)If an input error is detected (via client-side or server-side validation), provide suggestions for fixing the input in a timely and accessible manner.3.3.4 Error Prevention (Legal, Financial, Data) (Level AA)If the user can change or delete legal, financial, or test data, the changes / deletions are reversible, verified, or confirmed.4.1.3 Status Messages (Level AA)In content implemented using markup languages, status messages (e.g., system busy or system available announcements, the completion status of a search, form error or completion messages, progress of a process) can be programmatically determined through role or properties such that they can be presented to the user by assistive technologies without receiving focus.
Sheet 4: Level AAA criteria
Application Name: Table 3. WCAG 2.1 Guidelines: Level AAACriteriaConformance Level Remarks and Explanations1.2.6 Sign Language (Prerecorded) (Level AAA)A sign language video is provided for all media content that contains audio.1.2.7 Extended Audio Description (Prerecorded) (Level AAA)When an audio description track cannot be added to video due to audio timing (e.g., no pauses in the audio), an alternative version of the video with pauses that allow audio descriptions is provided.1.2.8 Media Alternative (Prerecorded) (Level AAA)A descriptive text transcript is provided for all pre-recorded media that has a video track.1.2.9 Audio-only (Live) (Level AAA)A descriptive text transcript (e.g., the script of the live audio) is provided for all live content that has audio.1.3.6 Identify Purpose (Level AAA)Content implemented using markup languages, the purpose of user interface components, icons, and regions can be programmatically determined.1.4.6 Contrast Enhanced (Level AAA)Text and images of text have a contrast ratio of at least 7:1.Large text (over 18 point or 14 point bold) has a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:11.4.7 Low or No Background Audio (Level AAA)Audio of speech has no or very low background noise so the speech is easily distinguished.1.4.8 Visual Presentation (Level AAA) Are no more than 80 characters wide.Are NOT fully justified (aligned to both the left and the right margins).Have a specified foreground and background color. These can be applied to specific elements or to the page as a whole using CSS (and thus inherited by all other elements).Do NOT require horizontal scrolling when the text size is doubled.1.4.9 Images of Text (No Exception) Control (Level AAA)Text is used within an image only for decoration (image does not convey content) OR when the information cannot be presented with text alone.2.1.3 Keyboard (No Exception) (Level AAA)All page functionality is available using the keyboard.2.2.3 No Timing (Level AAA)The content and functionality has no time limits or constraints.2.2.4 Interruptions (Level AAA)Interruptions (alerts, page updates, etc.) can be postponed or suppressed by the user.2.2.5 Re-authenticating (Level AAA)If an authentication session expires, the user can re-authenticate and continue the activity without losing any data from the current page.2.2.6 Timeouts (Level AAA)Users are warned of the duration of any user inactivity that could cause data loss, unless the data is preserved for more than 20 hours when the user does not take any actions.2.3.2 Three Flashes (Level AAA)No page content flashes more than 3 times per second.2.3.3 Animation from Interactions (Level AAA)Motion animation triggered by interaction can be disabled, unless the animation is essential to the functionality or the information being conveyed.2.4.8 Location (Level AAA)If a web page is part of a sequence of pages or within a complex site structure, an indication of the current page location is provided, for example, through breadcrumbs or specifying the current step in a sequence (e.g., "Step 2 of 5 - Shipping Address").2.4.9 Link Purpose (Link Only) (Level AAA)The purpose of each link (or form image button or image map hotspot) can be determined from the link text alone.There are no links (or form image buttons) with the same text that go to different locations.2.4.10 Section Headings (Level AAA)Beyond providing an overall document structure, individual sections of content are designated using headings, where appropriate.2.5.5 Target Size (Level AAA)The size of the target for pointer inputs is at least 44 by 44 CSS pixels except when: a) the target is available through an equivalent link or control on the same page that is at least 44 by 44 CSS pixels; b) the target is in a sentence or block of text; c) the size of target is determined by the user agent and is not modified by the author; d) a particular presentation of the target is essential to the information being conveyed.2.5.6 Concurrent Input Mechanisms (Level AAA)Web content does not restrict use of input modalities available on a platform except where the restriction is essential, required to ensure the security of the content, or required to respect user settings.3.1.3 Unusual Words (Level AAA)Words that may be ambiguous, unknown, or used in a very specific way are defined through adjacent text, a definition list, a glossary, or other suitable method.3.1.4 Abbreviations (Level AAA)Expansions for abbreviations are provided by expanding or explaining the definition the first time it is used, using the <abbr> element, or linking to a definition or glossary.NOTE: WCAG 2.0 gives no exception for regularly understood abbreviations (e.g., "HTML" on a web design site must always be expanded).3.1.5 Reading Level (Level AAA)A more understandable alternative is provided for content that is more advanced than can be reasonably read by a person with roughly 9 years of primary education.3.1.6 Pronunciation (Level AAA)If the pronunciation of a word is vital to understanding that word, its pronunciation is provided immediately following the word or via a link or glossary.3.2.5 Change on Request (Level AAA)Substantial changes to the page, the spawning of pop-up windows, uncontrolled changes of keyboard focus, or any other change that could confuse or disorient the user must be initiated by the user. Alternatively, the user is provided an option to disable such changes.3.3.5 Help (Level AAA)Provide instructions and cues in context to help in form completion and submission.3.3.6 Error Prevention (All) (Level AAA)If the user can submit information, the submission is reversible, verified, or confirmed.
