WCAG 2 Checklist: A Comprehensive Guide to Web Accessibility  
 
Criterion  Level  Summary  Points to Ponder  1.1.1 Non-
Text Content A Provide text alternatives for non-text content that serves the same purpose. Always provide alternative options like audio or OTP (one time password) for CAPTCHA. Always provide textual summary or description for complex charts and graphs apart from shot alt text. Always use title attribute for additional info while using alt attribute in image links. 1.2.1 Audio-
Only and 
Video-Only A Provide an alternative to video-only and audio-only content. Provide text transcripts for audio tracks. Provide either text transcript or an audio track for a silent video. If an audio is provided for video then text transcript is not required. (Exception) 1.2.2 Captions (Prerecorded) A Provide captions for videos with audio. Provide captions for the video that has audio. If video is the alternative for text content  then   it doesn't  need  captions.  (Exception). If possible provide captions in multiple languages as this helps users to choose the language they can follow. 1.2.3 Audio 
Description or 
Media 
Alternative A Provide audio description or text transcript for videos with sound. Provide audio descriptions if possible or provide text transcripts for the video. Videos  that  rely  on  sound  only  doesn't  require audio descriptions. Example: interviews, speeches. This ultimate WCAG 2.1 Checklist provides a simplified explanation of the Web Content Accessibility  Guidelines (WCAG) and the most important accessibility  requirements that website owners, designers, developers, product managers, and  organizations need  to follow. By using this checklist, users can easily refer to  the key points and  ensure that their digital products and services comply with accessibility standards, thereby improving  the user experience for all  visitors, including those  with disabilities, and reducing the risk of legal liabilities.  
 
WCAG 2.1 Level AA Checklist  
 

 
1.2.4 Captions (Live) AA Add captions to live videos. Provide captions for a live broadcast. Use media players or broadcast platforms where live captioning is supported. 1.2.5 Audio 
Description 
(Pre-
Recorded) AA Provide audio descriptions for pre-recorded videos. Provide audio descriptions where visual aspect is not explained in the dialog of the video. The audio description can either be separate from the original video or be an integral part of the video. Audio description must include scene changes, settings, actions that are described in dialogues and any other visual information that is not conveyed via a speech or dialog. Use media players that support audio descriptions. 1.3.1 Info and Relationships A Content, structure and relationships can be programmatically determined. •     Emphasis -  Use <em> and <strong> instead of using Italics and Bold texts to highlight important texts; use <blockquote> to mark quotations. 
•     Headings -  Provide hierarchically logical heading markup for the contents  
•     Table -  Provide HTML table markup and provide column headers for simple tables and column headers and row headers for complex tables. 
•     Table -  When using nested tables, consider the possibility of breaking the content into logical individual tables instead of nested tables  
•     Forms -  Provide programmatic association of visible labels or appropriate accessible names to all the form elements  
•     Lists -  Markup the contents that logically fall into list as ordered or unordered list. Do not put huge text blocks which is otherwise are paragraphs as lists  
•     Grouping -  Provide grouping and group level labels to mark a group of form elements like radio buttons or checkboxes; use <fieldset> and  
   legend to achieve grouping and group level association for native form elements; use ARIA to achieve the same where custom form controls are used; use native semantic markup frequently and ARIA sparingly. 1.3.2 
Meaningful 
Sequence A Present content in a meaningful order. Make sure that content presented on the page is logical & intuitive. Write HTML first & then manage design with CSS. Make sure visual order matches the DOM order. Use headings, lists, paragraphs etc to mark your content. Make sure your users can differentiate the navigation menus from main content. 1.3.3 Sensory 
Characteristics A Instructions don't  rely solely on sensory characteristics. While using shape and or location, provide visible labels/names to the controls. 
When combining color and shape/size/location/orientation, provide off-screen text for screen reader users. 
When using sound as a clue, combine it with text/color based clues. 1.3.4 
Orientation AA Your website adapts to portrait and landscape views. Don't  restrict  your  application or  website to just work in landscape or portrait mode. Make sure to honor the device settings while displaying the application in landscape or portrait mode. 1.3.5 Identify Input Purpose AA The purpose of input fields must be programmatically determinable. Provide programmatically determinable input purpose. Use appropriate token values while using autocomplete attribute. Do not use autocomplete on input fields that does not ask for user data.  
1.4.1 Use of Color A Don't  use presentation that relies solely on colour. Don't  use color as sole method  to convey information. Make sure instructions/prompts provided in text don't  refer  to  color  alone. Make sure  instructions are provided in text for graphs & charts where color is used to convey information. Provide more than one visual clue that include common icons and colors to differentiate texts and user interface elements. 1.4.2 Audio Control A Don't  play audio automatically. Don't  play audio  automatically if  possible. Make sure your audio is less than 3 seconds. If audio is more than 3 seconds then provide a pause/stop or a mechanism to control the audio player volume from the overall system volume. Make sure that focus is on the pause/stop or volume control as soon as page opens if audio is playing automatically. 1.4.3 Contrast 
Minimum AA Contrast ratio between text and background is at least 4.5:1. Develop the style guide in such a way that all the texts that are crucial meet the minimum contrast. Choose color schemes that are contrastive enough for everyone to see and read. Provide a "Contrast" mode  with  the help  of  
alternative  CSS if  you  can't  Design  and  
develop the content with the minimum contrast requirement. 1.4.4 Resize Text AA Text can be resized to 200% without loss of content or function. Where browsers do not support or provide zoom functionality (IE6 as an example), provide alternative CSS for scaling purpose. When zoomed to 200%, ensure there is no much of horizontal scrolling (a best practice). Where lengthy user interface components or content like subject line of an email is there, truncate and provide ways along with the instructions to access the content.  
1.4.5 Images of Text AA Don't  use images of text. Use CSS styled headings instead of Bitmap images. Provide site-wide controls to customize the images of texts when there are dynamically generated images of texts. Use CSS to specify spacing, alignment, color and the font family of any UI elements, their texts and icons, quotations etc. Use keyboard generated symbols wherever possible instead of making them as images. 1.4.10 Reflow AA Content retains meaning and function without scrolling in two dimensions. Use Responsive Web Design (RWD) from the conception of design itself. Use accessible links, modals, toggle type elements to show or hide content. Avoid horizontal scroll bars in 400% zoom. Avoid content overlaps, clipping, content loss and functionality loss. 1.4.11 Non-
Text Contrast AA The contrast between user interface components, graphics and adjacent colours is at least 3:1. Ensure hit-areas and focus indicators have 3:1 contrast ratio with their inner or outer background. Ensure the checked/unchecked states meet the 3:1 ratio against their adjacent color in order to distinguish the states. Ensure parts of graphs and charts where color is the only way to decipher the information, the contrast ratio is met against adjacent colors. Ensure appropriate color combinations are chosen and defined for UI elements and other graphical objects in the style guides and the design documents in order to avoid uncomfortable retrofitting. 1.4.12 Text Spacing AA Content and function retain meaning when users change elements of text spacing. Don't  use fixed  containers in  your CSS styles. Make sure that content reflows without overlapping or text cut-offs. Use relative units of font size, line height, spaces between characters, words, lines and paragraphs.  
1.4.13 
Content on 
Hover or Focus AA When hover or focus triggers content to appear, 
it is dismissible, hoverable and persistent. Provide a method to dismiss the additional content that appear on hover or keyboard focus. Make sure that content is present until the user moves away the mouse pointer from the triggering element or content block. 
Make sure that experience is persistent. 2.1.1 Keyboard A All functionality is accessible by keyboard with no specific timings. Make sure all elements on the page buttons, links, form controls etc. are reachable by tab key. Make sure that users are able to activate the buttons, links & form controls using the enter and/or spacebar keys. Write clean HTML & CSS as it is keyboard operable by default  & doesn't  require any special tweaks. Make sure that there is a visible focus for all the active elements on the page. Make sure that focus order is logical & intuitive. Provide tabindex=0 for custom UI elements so that they are focusable. Provide appropriate event handlers for custom scripted elements so that they are operable by their respective keys. Avoid access keys if possible. If not, at least, ensure they 
don't  conflict  with  the  user agent and/or AT shortcut keys. Make sure that there is no time limit to perform any action using the keyboard when more than one key is required to operate a control. 2.1.2 No keyboard Trap A Users can navigate to and from all content using a keyboard. Make sure that users can tab to & away from all parts of the site. If a user is trapped on a portion of the web page for a purpose, a clear instruction must be provided for the user to end that keyboard trap. Check if all parts of the site is operable using only keyboard, test by unplugging the mouse. Stick to standard navigation as much as possible like tab, shift+tab & arrow keys. If custom keystrokes are provided to operate a control make sure hints are exposed to all users. Make sure your third party widgets are accessible,  
   most of the time they cause major keyboard operability issues. 2.1.4 
Character Key Shortcuts A Allow users to turn off or remap single-key character shortcuts. Don't  use single character key shortcuts  if possible. Provide a mechanism to turn off the character key shortcuts. Design all the keyboard shortcuts with the combinations of non-printable keys. Let the user trigger the shortcut key only when the element has keyboard focus. 2.2.1 Timing Adjustable A Provide user controls to turn off, adjust or extend time limits. Provide a control on the landing page for the user to initiate a longer session time or no session timeout. Provide a way for the user to turn off the session time out. Provide a means to set the time limit to 10 times the default time limit. Prompt the user with help of a pop-up or modal so that enough warning is available for the user to reset the time limit. Make sure controls provided to extend the time limit are keyboard operable. Moving, scrolling and/or blinking content must have mechanism to pause or stop the movement or scroll or blink. Auto updating content must be provided with feature to extend the time limit to 
10 times of its actual update frequency.  
2.2.2 Pause, Stop, Hide A Provide user controls to pause, stop and hide moving and autoupdating content. Avoid moving, blinking scrolling content if possible. Content should not blink more than 3 times per second, if it does blink 3times per second then it is considered as flashing & will fail WCAG. Auto updating content should be provided with a pause button or provide a mechanism for the user to specify when the update can happen. If the entire page contains moving, blinking, scrolling & auto updating content then pause, stop or hide buttons are not required as there is no parallel content. Animation that conveys the users that a page or content  is loading  doesn't  require to meet this success criterion. 2.3.1 Three 
Flashes or Below A No content flashes more than three times per second. Avoid flashing content completely if possible. Make sure that flashing content  doesn't  flash  more  than  3 times  per second. Use PEAT to confirm if the flashing content passes this check point. 2.4.1 Bypass Blocks A Provide a way for users to skip repeated blocks of content. Provide a skip link on top of the page to skip navigational menus. Provide skip links to navigate to content on a large page. Make sure that skip link is visible when it receives focus. Make sure that purpose of the link is clear, provide skip link text as skip to main content or skip navigation etc. When providing ARIA landmarks, ensure multiple landmarks of the same type is not provided. If provided, ensure to use aria-label to assign unique names to such landmarks "Primary navigation", "secondary navigation" etc.  2.4.2 Page Titled A Use helpful and clear page titles. Provide a unique title. Make sure that title is between 50-75 characters. Make sure title of the page is the heading level H1 on the page. Title should contain web page name, bit of description & site name. Make sure title describes purpose of the page.  
2.4.3 Focus Order A Components 
receive focus in a logical sequence. Avoid using tabindex values that are >1 to manage focus order as they may supersede logical tab order. Align the focus order with the reading order as much as possible in order to maintain a logical and intuitive navigation of the content. Too much deviation would put a lot of users with disabilities into confusion 2.4.4 Link 
Purpose (In Context) A Every link's purpose is clear from its text or context. Let the purpose of the link be clear just by the link  text  alone!  E.G.  "My Blog", "Visit  our  Blog". Ensure  appropriate alt  text is provided when only an image stands as a link. Avoid ambiguous links 
like "here" or  "click  here". If they are  required make sure that they are placed at the end of the sentence or paragraph so that they are understood from context. Do not duplicate the alt text and the link text when there is an image and the link adjacent to each other and convey the same info or lead to same destination. Rather, wrap the image  with  the link  and  provide  alt="" for the image. Ensure Links having the same link text leads to same destination. 2.4.5 Multiple Ways AA Offer at least two ways to find pages on your website. More than one way must be available to meet this success criteria. Though breadcrumb is quite old, it still works if the users want to go back in a process or a layered structure. Search function is most powerful to achieve faster navigation. Menus may become larger and cumbersome; still they work wonders when you look up for a category. 2.4.6 
Headings and 
Labels AA Headings and labels describe topic or purpose. Headings must be clear, concise & descriptive. Headings must follow a sequential order to avoid confusion. Ensure that headings are consistent throughout the site. Ensure that labels are descriptive enough so that users can take necessary actions.  
2.4.7 Focus Visible AA Keyboard focus is visible when used. Let browsers handle the visible focus for active elements. Ensure that active element is provided with visible focus. Ensure that when the user is navigating through the page using keyboard visible focus moves along for every element presented on the page. Ensure that there is sufficient contrast between the visible focus & the background of the element, for example if the visible focus is black & the background of the element is black then focus visible is not visually distinguishable.2.5.1 Pointer Gestures A Multi-point and path-based gestures can be operated with a single pointer. Do not use multi-pointer or path-based gesture as a sole method to control content. Provide single tap or double tap/click as alternatives. Always have in mind that one mode does fit for all. 2.5.2 Pointer Cancellation A Functions don't  complete on the down-click of a pointer. Ensure down event alone does not execute any functionality. Ensure Up event reverses or un-does any down event-based action. Ensure a mechanism is available to confirm the performed action where down event executes such action 2.5.3 Label in 
Name A Where a component has a text label, the name of the component also contains the text displayed. Ensure the accessible names like arialabel and alt attribute contain the exact match of the visible label. Ensure the visible label text and accessible name text are not interspersed. Ensure the accessible name starts exactly with the visible name. 2.5.4 Motion Actuation A Functions operated by motion can also be operated through an interface and responding to motion can be disabled. Provide alternatives where motion actuation is used. Provide confirmation or cancelling mechanism. Allow system settings to deactivate motion detection.  
3.1.1 
Language of 
Page A Each webpage has a default human language assigned. Ensure each page of your web site has lang attribute. Ensure the language code is correct. Use appropriate language tokens in terms of language variations  like lang="en-us" for  English  in  US and  lang="en-uk" for  English  in  Britain. 3.1.2 
Language of 
Parts AA Each part of a webpage has a default human language assigned. Ensure to use appropriate language code (lang="fr") wherever  the text  is in  other language. Ensure appropriate language token is used in the lang attribute (lang="pt-br").Beware  of  the exceptions too. 3.2.1 On Focus A Elements do not change when they receive focus. Ensure that no element changes by receiving focus. We should avoid both visual & behavioral modifications to page. A website built using only HTML & CSS will not have on focus by default, one needs to provide this through scripting. One way to test this check point is to unplug the mouse & navigate the page using the keyboard. 3.2.2 On Input A Elements do not change when they receive input. Make sure  that  forms don't  submit  on  input of data. Make sure that focus doesn't  move to next form control once a form field is populated with data. Provide a submit button for all forms. Make sure that control of how data is populated is in the hands of your users. If there is a change of context, then provide an instruction that is available for all user groups. 3.2.3 
Consistent 
Navigation AA Position menus and standard controls consistently. Keep navigational menus in the same location. Present the navigational menus in the same order on all pages. Represent all the standard elements like logo, search functionality, and skip links etc. in the same location on all the pages. sing a standard template will help achieve to pass the success criteria of 3.2.3 consistent navigation.  
3.2.4 
Consistent 
Identification AA Identify components with the same function consistently. Icons & images that are used repeatedly and provide the same function must be provided with the same alternative text. Elements with the same function are named & labelled consistently. Use icons/images that are consistent. For example print, twitter, Facebook etc. Images will have different meaning in different contexts, so will need different alternative text depending on the context. 3.3.1 Error 
Identification A Identify and describe input errors for users. Make sure  that  errors are in  text.  Don't  just use color or visual cues to point out form errors. Use aria-describedby to bind the form control with the error programmatically.  Don't  disable  the submit button! Some websites disable the submit button & will only enable it if the form is filled appropriately. This is bad practice. Provide necessary instructions & be as specific as possible with the errors so that users can take necessary action. Make sure that errors are distinguished from the regular text on the web page. 3.3.2 Labels or Instruction A Provide labels or instructions for user input. Always provide visible labels to every form fields and controls. Provide instructions where the form fields require specific data or format. Ensure the labels identify the fields clearly. Do programmatically associate the labels with their respective fields. Provide group level labels and associate them with the group of form fields where the user input is required in more than one field like phone number or credit card number; also ensure to provide individual labels through title attribute in such scenarios.  
3.3.3 Error Suggestion AA Suggest corrections when users make mistakes. Provide descriptive errors. Provide visible hints that will enable the users to avoid errors during form submissions. Associate the errors with form controls using aria-describedby. Move the focus to the form control that has the error once validation failed, this reduces the number of key strokes. Mark the required fields with asterisk visually & programmatically with ariarequired. 3.3.4 Error 
Prevention 
(Legal, 
Financial, Data) AA Check, confirm and allow reversal of pages that cause important commitments. Make sure proper hints are provided to fill the data in the forms. Provide a review information screen where user provided information is populated. Provide a checkbox where user can confirm that they have reviewed all the information and they are ready to submit; enable the submit button only when user checks the checkbox. 
Provide confirmation screen or dialogue when users delete any data. 4.1.1 Parsing A No major code errors Use unique ids. Nest elements according to their specification. Avoid duplicate attributes. Make sure that HTML has both start & end tags. 4.1.2 Name, Role, Value A The name and role of user components can be understood by technology. Use native HTML elements wherever possible. USE WAI-ARIA attributes while constructing custom component widgets. Make sure custom widgets are keyboard operable using spacebar or enter keys. Provide tabindex=0 for custom widgets so that they receive tab focus. Make it a practice to read ARIA specifications to understand the implications and the consequences of ARIA roles, states and properties before using them 
D 
4.1.3 Status Messages AA Make sure that all messages indicating success or errors are read out by a screen reader. Ensure all success toasts and error messages are announced by screen reader. Do not fill the pages with live regions. Decide which is an important update and qualifies a status message intelligently. Ensure focusable messages are not considered as status messages. WCAG 2.1 AA Checklist 
 
 
This WCAG 2  checklist  is created  for  informative purposes  only,  and  the  web  version  is available on the DigitallA11Y website at  the  following link:  https://www.digitala11y.com/wcag-checklist/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c)  2023  DigitalA11Y  All Rights Reserved  
