Word and PowerPoint 365 Accessibility Evaluation Guide 
This guide combines automated checks from the Accessibility Checker in Microsoft Office 365 with a series of manual checks to help you evaluate and repair common accessibility issues.  
First, run the built-in Accessibility Checker. The Accessibility panel will display:  ERRORS, WARNINGS, TIPS, and INTELLIGENT SERVICES. Click on individual results to go to that issue in the document and make the necessary repairs. Then use the MANUAL review steps to identify any additional issues. 




Alt Text generated by Office is equivalent or is changed to be equivalent. INTELLIGENT SERVICES: Review AutoGenerated Description. Determine if the Alt Text value is appropriate.  Right click > View Alt Text. If the Alt 
Text value is appropriate, check Approve alt text. Otherwise update the text or check Mark as decorative. Image or object has equivalent Alt Text or is marked as decorative.  MANUAL: Determine if the Alt Text value is appropriate. Right click > View Alt Text. Update the text in the Alt Text or check Mark as Decorative. 
Color and Contrast 

Tables 
	Principle 	Review 	Repair 
The first row in a table contains 	ERROR: Missing Table Header 	Select table > Table Design > Check 
correctly-defined column headers 	Header Row checkbox 
(when appropriate). 
Tables have a simple structure, 	WARNING: Use of Merged or Split 	• Select table > Layout tab >
avoiding merged cells or split cells 	Cells. Use the Tab key to ensure the 	Merge Cells, OR when possible. 	order of the cells in the table is 	• Select Layout tab > Split Cells. logical. 	Set number of columns or rows

When the first column of a table should contain headers, they are correctly identified as row headers. 
MANUAL: Determine if the text in the cells of the first column function as row headers. 
to match the table structure before cells were merged.
• Select the table > Table Design. Check or uncheck the First Column checkbox to match the table's structure.


Avoid layout tables. Where they must be used, ensure that the content reading order matches the visual order. MANUAL: Review the document for tables that do not present data. Determine if the content can be presented with an alternative method (e.g., columns). If not, use the Tab key to check the reading order. • Select table > Layout tab > Convert to Text to remove content from a table, OR
• Rearrange the table's content to align the reading order with the visual order.Tables should not use empty columns or rows for visual formatting. MANUAL: Review the document for tables with empty columns or rows. Right click empty column or row > Delete Cells > Choose Delete entire row or Delete entire column > OK 
